The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Journal of the American-Irish
Historical Society (Vol. VI), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society (Vol. VI)

Author: Various

Editor: Thomas Hamilton Murray

Release Date: October 2, 2020 [EBook #63039]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL--AMERICAN-IRISH HIST. SOC. (VI) ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)






[Illustration:

  THE HONORABLE THEODORE ROOSEVELT,

  President of the United States.

  An Active Member of the Society.
]




                              THE JOURNAL
                                 OF THE
                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


                                   BY

                        THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,

                          _Secretary-General_.


                               VOLUME VI.


                             BOSTON, MASS.,
                       PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY,
                                 1906.




[Illustration: AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY THAT THE WORLD MAY
KNOW. FOUNDED, A.D. 1897]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


  AN INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
  OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY, A. D. 1906.
  THE ANNUAL MEETING AND DINNER, A. D. 1906.
  ADDRESS TO THE SOCIETY BY PRESIDENT-GENERAL McGOWAN.
  RECEPTION TO THE PRESIDENT-GENERAL.
  SOME HISTORICAL PAPERS.
  REVIEW OF THE YEAR.
  NECROLOGY.
  MEMBERSHIP ROLL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
  PRESIDENTS-GENERAL OF THE SOCIETY.
  GENERAL INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
  GOOD WORDS FOR VOL. V OF THE JOURNAL OF THE SOCIETY.
  GENERAL INDEX.




                         AN INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


This is the sixth volume of the JOURNAL of the Society. It continues the
series so auspiciously begun years ago and which has been added to
annually. These six volumes represent a great amount of work and contain
a vast deal of historical material relative to the Irish element in the
composition of the American people. As we progress with our researches,
even we ourselves are quite astonished at the facts brought to light,
facts showing in a far greater degree than anticipated, how tremendously
important was the part taken by the Irish element in American colonial
life and in the early and subsequent career of the republic itself. The
present volume sets forth much matter of interest and value in this
regard, and is in every way a worthy companion for the volumes of the
JOURNAL that have preceded it.

BOSTON, MASS., December 31, 1906.




                  OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY, A. D. 1906.


                          _President-General_,
            =Rear Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N.= (retired),
                           Washington, D. C.


                       _Vice-President-General_,
                      =Hon. Franklin M. Danaher=,
                             Albany, N. Y.


                          _Secretary General_,
                       =Thomas Hamilton Murray=,
                    36 Newbury Street, Boston, Mass.


                          _Treasurer-General_,
                          =Michael F. Dooley=,
               Of the Union Trust Co., Providence, R. I.


                       _Librarian and Archivist_,
                          =Thomas B. Lawler=,
          Of Ginn & Company, publishers, Boston and New York.


                           EXECUTIVE COUNCIL,

                           The foregoing and

 =Hon. John D. Crimmins=, New York City.
 =Hon. William McAdoo=, New York City.
 =Hon. Thomas J. Gargan=, Boston, Mass.
 =Patrick F. Magrath=, Binghamton, N. Y.
 =Rev. John J. McCoy, LL. D.=, Worcester, Mass.
 =Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D., LL. D.=, New York City.
 =Edward J. McGuire=, New York City.
 =John F. O’Connell=, Providence, R. I.
 =James L. O’Neill=, Elizabeth, N. J.
 =Stephen Farrelly=, New York City.
 =Cyrus Townsend Brady, LL. D.=, Toledo, Ohio.
 =Hon. Thomas J. Lynch=, Augusta, Me.
 =John J. Lenehan=, New York City.
 =Hon. Thomas Z. Lee=, Providence, R. I.
 =Hon. Patrick Garvan=, Hartford, Conn.
 =Maj. John Crane=, New York City.
 =Col. John McManus=, Providence, R. I.
 =Hon. William Gorman=, Philadelphia, Pa.
 =Col. C. C. Sanders=, Gainesville, Ga.
 =John F. Doyle=, New York City.


                         STATE VICE-PRESIDENTS.

 Maine—=James Cunningham=, Portland.
 New Hampshire—=Hon. James F. Brennan=, Peterborough.
 Vermont—=John D. Hanrahan, M. D.=, Rutland.
 Massachusetts—=Hon. Joseph H. O’Neil=, Boston.
 Rhode Island—=Thomas A. O’Gorman=, Providence.
 Connecticut—=Dennis H. Tierney=, Waterbury.
 New York—=Joseph I. C. Clarke=, New York City.
 New Jersey—=John F. Kehoe=, Newark.
 Pennsylvania—=Hugh McCaffrey=, Philadelphia.
 Delaware—=John J. Cassidy=, Wilmington.
 Virginia—=James W. McCarrick=, Norfolk.
 West Virginia—=John F. Healy=, Thomas, Tucker County.
 South Carolina—=Henry A. Molony=, Charleston.
 Georgia—=Capt. John Flannery=, Savannah.
 Ohio—=John Lavelle=, Cleveland.
 Illinois—=Hon. P. T. Barry=, Chicago.
 Indiana—=Very Rev. Andrew Morrissey, C. S. C.=, Notre Dame.
 Iowa—=Rt. Rev. Philip J. Garrigan, D. D.=, Sioux City.
 Montana—=Rt. Rev. M. C. Lenihan, D. D.=, Great Falls.
 Minnesota—=Hon. C. D. O’Brien=, St. Paul.
 Missouri—=Julius L. Foy=, St. Louis.
 Kentucky—=John J. Slattery=, Louisville.
 Kansas—=Patrick H. Coney=, Topeka.
 Utah—=Joseph Geoghegan=, Salt Lake City.
 Texas—=Gen. A. G. Malloy=, El Paso.
 California—=James Connolly=, Coronado.


                         OTHER VICE-PRESIDENTS.

 District of Columbia—=Hon. Edward A. Moseley=, Washington.
 Arizona—=Col. O’Brien Moore=, Tucson.
 Indian Territory—=Joseph F. Swords=, Sulphur.
 Canada—=Hon. Felix Carbray=, Quebec.
 Ireland—=Dr. Michael F. Cox=, Dublin.




               THE ANNUAL MEETING AND DINNER, A. D. 1906.


The annual meeting and dinner of the Society took place at the Hotel
Manhattan, 42d Street and Madison Avenue, New York City, on Thursday
evening, January 18, 1906. Preceding the meeting a reception was held,
during which the members and guests from various cities and states
exchanged greetings and congratulated each other upon the continued
success of the organization.

The annual meeting was called to order by Hon. John D. Crimmins of New
York City, president-general of the Society.

Thomas Hamilton Murray of Boston, Mass., secretary-general of the
organization, recorded the minutes of the meeting.

Mr. Crimmins delivered an address of welcome and felicitated the Society
upon its usefulness and good work in the cause of historical truth.

It was voted that, in order to save time, the reading of the records of
the preceding meeting be omitted.

The annual reports of the secretary-general and the treasurer-general
were then presented, and were accepted and adopted.

Appropriate action was taken on members of the Society who had died
during the year.

Mr. Edward J. McGuire of New York City, paid an eloquent tribute to the
late Francis C. Travers of the Society. Mr. Travers was one of the
leading New York members of the organization and always took an active
interest in advancing its interests and welfare.

The list of officers nominated by the executive council to serve the
Society for the ensuing year, was presented and was unanimously elected,
the secretary-general being authorized to cast one ballot for the same.
(The ticket is set forth on pages 5 and 6 of this volume.)

Upon the result of the election being announced, Hon. Franklin M.
Danaher of Albany, N. Y., the newly-chosen vice-president-general, took
the chair, in the absence of Admiral McGowan, the new president-general.

Judge Danaher thanked the members for the honor bestowed upon him, and
delivered a brief address along the Society’s line of work.

During the meeting attention was called to the movement to erect a
monument in Washington, D. C., to Commodore John Barry, and the active
interest of the members of the Society was urged in behalf of the
project.

After thanks had been extended the retiring officers for their services
to the Society, several new members were elected and the meeting
adjourned.


                           THE ANNUAL DINNER.

Upon the adjournment of the business meeting, the members and guests
proceeded to the banquet hall of the Manhattan for the annual dinner.
Judge Danaher presided and seated on his right and left, among others,
were: the retiring president-general, Hon. John D. Crimmins; Hon. Joseph
T. Lawless of Norfolk, Va.; Michael F. Dooley, of the Union Trust
Company, Providence, R. I.; Hon. John Hannan, mayor of Ogdensburg, N.
Y.; Hon. John F. Finerty, Chicago, Ill., and other prominent gentlemen.

After grace had been said, the company began a practical discussion of
the elaborate menu prepared for the occasion. Among those present were
the following:


                FROM NEW YORK CITY, INCLUDING BROOKLYN.

 Hon. John D. Crimmins.
 Rev. Henry A. Brann, D. D.
 Hon. Joseph F. Daly.
 Henry Wright.
 Stephen J. Richardson.
 F. J. Richardson.
 James J. Phelan.
 Thomas F. Smith.
 James Kearney.
 T. P. Kelly.
 Edward J. McGuire.
 Dr. Bryan DeF. Sheedy.
 Francis D. Ward.
 W. H. Mahony.
 John Quinn.
 Cyril Crimmins.
 William F. Daly.
 John J. Lenehan.
 Edmond J. Curry.
 John O’Sullivan.
 Willis B. Dowd.
 P. J. O’Leary.
 James T. Ryan.
 Warren E. Mosher.
 D. H. McBride.
 John F. Doyle.
 Alfred L. Doyle.
 Edward H. Daly.
 E. Clinton Smith.
 Richard P. Morrissey.
 David Healy.
 J. E. Smith, M. D.
 Maurice O’Meara.
 R. J. O’Donnell.
 Edward M. Tierney.
 F. H. Stoltzenberg, Jr.
 John E. Milholland.
 Dr. C. E. Byrne.
 W. F. Clare.
 John J. Daly.
 William J. Broderick.
 P. J. Hughes.
 John Flanigan.
 Charles V. Halley, Sr.
 Charles V. Halley, Jr.
 John J. Fox.
 James O’Flaherty.
 A. J. Meister.
 Maj. E. T. McCrystal.
 Matthew J. Flynn.
 Robert Watchorn.
 John H. Regan.
 John H. Rogan.
 Peter McDonnell, Jr.
 John J. Ryan.
 Patrick Kiernan.
 T. Vincent Butler.
 John Jay Joyce.
 Henry L. Joyce.
 James F. Roach.
 J. O’Carroll.
 J. R. Adams.
 John J. Haigney.
 H. Van Atta.
 Theron Van Atta.
 Frank V. A. Loucks.
 John J. Sullivan.
 Andrew J. Curtin.
 James P. Farrell.
 Daniel Moynahan.
 James W. O’Brien.
 George A. Fleury.
 Joseph Hopkins.
 George W. Sweeney.
 Daniel J. Curtin.
 Sylvester J. O’Sullivan.
 J. D. Rohan.


                       PRESENT FROM OTHER PLACES.

 Hon. Joseph T. Lawless, Norfolk, Va.
 Hon. Franklin M. Danaher, Albany, N. Y.
 Hon. John F. Finerty, Chicago, Ill.
 Hon. John Hannan, Ogdensburg, N. Y.
 Hon. J. J. O’Connor, Elmira, N. Y.
 Hon. Thomas Z. Lee, Providence, R. I.
 P. F. Magrath, Binghamton, N. Y.
 James O’Sullivan, Lowell, Mass.
 Rev. James O’Doherty, Haverhill, Mass.
 Rev. John D. Coyle, New Haven, Conn.
 Hugh N. Murphy, Newark, N. J.
 Patrick Cassidy, M. D., Norwich, Conn.
 Henry V. McLaughlin, M. D., Brookline, Mass.
 J. F. O’Reilly, Montclair, N. J.
 John F. Hayes, M. D., Waterbury, Conn.
 Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass.
 Patrick Carter, Providence, R. I.
 George J. Twohy, Norfolk, Va.
 R. J. Donahue, Ogdensburg, N. Y.
 Michael F. Dooley, Providence, R. I.
 James L. O’Neill, Elizabeth, N. J.
 Joseph M. Byrne, Newark, N. J.
 Don C. Seitz, Cos Cob, Conn.
 Bernard J. Joyce, Boston, Mass.
 Dennis H. Tierney, Waterbury, Conn.
 John T. F. MacDonnell, Holyoke, Mass.
 Thomas A. O’Gorman, Providence, R. I.
 M. P. O’Connor, Binghamton, N. Y.
 P. H. Garrity, Waterbury, Conn.
 Richard Tillard, Newark, N. J.
 Francis I. McCanna, Providence, R. I.
 H. S. Tierney, Torrington, Conn.
 James J. Higgins, Elizabeth, N. J.
 Thomas J. Spellacy, Hartford, Conn.
 John F. O’Connell, Providence, R. I.
 John Haddow, Newark, N. J.
 Michael J. Morkan, Hartford, Conn.
 William J. Kelly, Portsmouth, N. H.
 John J. McNally, Norfolk, Va.

The after-dinner exercises were of unusual interest, Judge Danaher
presiding, as he had over the dinner, and the various events on the
program being most enjoyable.

The leading paper of the evening was by Hon. Joseph T. Lawless of
Norfolk, Va., whose subject was “Gen. Daniel Morgan of the Revolution.”
It was a very able production and was highly appreciated.

Willis B. Dowd of New York City, read a paper on the “Early Irish
Settlers of North Carolina,” showing much research on his part, and
being a valuable contribution to the historical papers of the Society.

There were also addresses by Hon. John F. Finerty of Chicago, Ill., and
by other gentlemen.

The evening’s exercises likewise included solo and chorus singing, with
orchestral accompaniment, the selections including “The Star Spangled
Banner” and “Killarney.”




          ADDRESS TO THE SOCIETY BY PRESIDENT-GENERAL McGOWAN.


The following address was issued early in the year by President-General
McGowan:

  _To the Members of the American-Irish Historical Society_:

  GENTLEMEN: Permit me to express my gratitude for the honor you have
  done me in electing me to be your president-general for the ensuing
  year. I accept the office, and will discharge its duties and
  responsibilities to the utmost of my ability.

  To be the official head of a society such as ours is a position any
  man, no matter how exalted his place in life, should be proud to
  hold. My distinguished predecessors in the office—Meade, Moseley,
  Gargan, Crimmins, McAdoo—have ably presided over the Society’s
  affairs in the past and have reflected honor upon the organization,
  as honor has been reflected upon them in virtue of their being
  chosen to that high station.

  The American-Irish Historical Society is now in its tenth year of
  existence. It has accomplished a vast amount of good, and the
  practical work it has so abundantly performed is of permanent value
  and utility. No organization was more needed and none has a broader
  or more glorious field in which to work.

  The Irish chapter in American history is one of the most important
  and interesting in our career as a nation. It was a strong and
  important chapter in America for even a century before we became a
  nation, and has gone on increasing in importance and potency, in
  value and interest, as generation has succeeded generation, until
  today it stands unsurpassed in the respects mentioned.

  As John Boyle O’Reilly once wrote,

             We slight no true devotion, steal no fame
             From other shrines to gild the Pilgrims’ name.

  So I may say, we rob no race to gild the Irish name when we
  undertake to unearth the records of the past, showing what the Irish
  element has accomplished in the early colonial periods and in later
  periods when the republic was forming and had become a fact. We
  merely wish to claim, assert and set forth the credit which to us
  belongs, for the part that men and women of Irish blood took in
  bringing about the reign of liberty and freedom we now enjoy.

  Toward people of all other race elements in the make-up of the
  American people—English, French, Dutch, German, etc., by whatever
  name they may be known or from whatever land they or their ancestors
  may have come—we entertain good will and desire them to have such
  meed of credit and of praise as to them belongs. We do not wish to
  praise ourselves by “masquerading in borrowed plumes,” nor have we
  any desire to detract one iota from the credit that is honestly that
  of others.

  But the credit that is ours we demand and shall insist upon
  possessing. Our mission is “To make better known the Irish chapter
  in American history.” That brief statement of our principles conveys
  in a very few words our exact reason for existence as a society.

  We are an American historical organization devoted to a work that
  shall place the Irish element in this great republic in its proper
  and merited position before the American people of which we
  constitute no small part, and which shall, at the same time, reflect
  glory upon the Irish fatherland. Our Society rests upon a generous
  basis. Its founders builded wisely and for the perpetuation of the
  heroic deeds of the past. I trust these founders will long be
  honored by every member of the organization.

  Reviewing the work thus far accomplished by the Society, I am
  prompted to say a few words: With very limited financial means, we
  have, nevertheless, produced five handsome volumes of the JOURNAL of
  the organization, two other volumes of great merit and a number of
  extremely interesting pamphlets. Copies of these publications have
  been placed in the leading libraries of the country, where they have
  been cordially welcomed. Our publications are in the libraries of
  such institutions as Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Dartmouth, Cornell,
  Georgetown, Princeton, and other great universities, where they are
  having an excellent influence.

  Here in Washington our publications are in the library of Congress,
  in that of the George Washington University, in the Catholic
  University and in the newly-established Trinity College for young
  women. The United States Military Academy at West Point also has our
  works on its shelves, as has the Naval Academy at Annapolis. From
  many leading historical societies come reports of our publications
  being received by them.

  Many of the great public libraries—North, South, East and West are
  in receipt of the works issued by our Society, and the same are in
  constant demand for consultation and reference. Among these public
  libraries are those of New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston,
  Chicago, Troy, Rochester, Oswego, Buffalo, Detroit, Milwaukee,
  Minneapolis, Denver, San Francisco and other cities.

  This is practical work. I know of no other society that in so short
  a time has done so much of real, lasting value as has ours. Indeed,
  when we consider all the circumstances, we have done astonishingly
  well. Many societies hoary with age, in the possession of plethoric
  treasuries, and constantly receiving large bequests, have done no
  better, if as well, from a practical viewpoint.

  Our Society is fortunate in having an indefatigable secretary, who
  from the start has worked in season and out of season to advance the
  interests of the organization. A competent secretary is a priceless
  possession for any society, and we have been especially fortunate in
  this respect.

  The Hon. John D. Crimmins of New York City, my immediate predecessor
  in the office of president-general, has always been ready with
  purse, services and hospitality to forward the interests of the
  Society, and under his administration the organization has made
  splendid progress. Owing to his initiative, a movement has just been
  started to raise a permanent fund of $10,000 for the organization.
  This is good news, indeed, and I have no doubt the amount will be
  speedily raised. With a substantial fund such as this back of it,
  the Society will be enabled to be of even greater service in the
  future than it has in the past.

  The salient work of the organization must be its publications. The
  more we have of these the better for the cause we have at heart.
  While a dinner, now and then, is desirable, the organization must
  never deteriorate into a mere dining club. Too many societies,
  started with the most comprehensive program, have done this and lost
  sight of their original purposes. Our Society differs from others in
  that it is established for historical purposes, to make original
  research into the records and documents of the past and to place the
  result of its researches in permanent, tangible form. Careful and
  frequent publications will enable us to do this.

  A great deal depends upon the continued issuance of the annual
  volume of the JOURNAL of our Society. That work has thus far been,
  and will continue to be, of the greatest possible utility. It gives
  the Society a recognized standing in the community that would be
  difficult to obtain by any other means. Its advent, year by year,
  therefore, is of prime importance.

  Speaking incidentally, I may say that I would like to see special
  attention given during the year to a study of the material bearing
  upon the reputed voyages to these shores of the Irish missionary,
  Brendan. These voyages, attributed to a period many centuries
  preceding Christopher Columbus, appear to be fully as well
  authenticated as those of the Northmen to Vinland. Indeed, the Norse
  sagas mention remote Irish comers to these shores and duly credit a
  land here once known as Great Ireland. De Roo, in his recent work,
  the _History of America Before Columbus_, goes into this subject in
  a very entertaining manner. As a rule, our school text-books on
  history, while accepting implicitly the narratives relative to the
  Northmen and Vinland, find no room in their pages to even allude to
  Brendan and his voyages, although, as I have intimated, the latter
  seem to rest upon as secure an historical basis as the former. Mr.
  Justin Winsor and other distinguished writers, however, make special
  mention of the subject and treat the latter with respect.

  The history of the early Irish in Virginia is also deserving of our
  special attention. Irish names are found in the Old Dominion prior
  to the arrival of the Pilgrims at Plymouth Rock, while in the
  Plymouth colony itself, Governor Bradford tells us, numbers of Irish
  arrived a few years after the coming of the _Mayflower_. The war
  against the Indian king, Philip, 1675–’76, found Irish enlisted on
  the side of the colonists, showing that at that period sons of old
  Hibernia were numerous and active here. These and other early
  periods and movements furnish our Society ample material for
  consideration.

  As American history progresses, the material increases in volume and
  is greatly multiplied as the Revolution eventuates. But these facts
  are well known to you and require no lengthy narrative of detail on
  my part. I merely briefly refer to them in order, by way of review,
  to indicate the abundance of material awaiting development at our
  hands.

  I am delighted with the project now under way by the Society to
  erect a bronze tablet in the Rhode Island state capitol to the
  memory of Maj.-Gen. John Sullivan. The idea is a most felicitous one
  and deserves the heartiest commendation. Sullivan was one of the
  great soldiers of the Revolution. The placing of the forthcoming
  tablet will be a merited tribute to his patriotism and military
  skill while in command of the Rhode Island department and during the
  entire period of the war.

  There are many other great Americans of Irish blood who deserve like
  honors, and doubtless the Society will, from time to time, erect
  tablets to their memory or commemorate them in some other worthy
  manner. The suggestion that the occasion of the dedication of the
  Sullivan tablet be made a field day by the Society is a happy one,
  and will, I trust, be fully carried out.

  As our Society grows in numbers and prosperity, the question of
  permanent headquarters will demand consideration. Books and
  pamphlets will accumulate by gift or purchase and a place will be
  needed where these can be displayed for consultation by the members
  and others engaged in historical research. Where these headquarters
  shall be located is a subject for future action. A number of cities
  are deserving of consideration. In many respects, Washington, the
  national capital, would be the ideal place, while, New York, Boston,
  Philadelphia and other cities, also present special advantages. But
  this whole matter can be fully considered at some future time.

  The Society recalls with pleasure its visit to Washington a few
  years ago, when it was cordially received at the White House by our
  distinguished fellow-member, President Roosevelt. I hope that during
  my term as head of the organization the Society will again have
  occasion to visit the national capital and once more partake of
  Washington hospitality.

  Again expressing my gratitude for the honor you have conferred upon
  me and hoping that I shall have, while president-general, the
  generous assistance of every member of the Society, I remain

                                            Yours fraternally,
                                                JOHN MCGOWAN,
                                                  _President-General_.

  WASHINGTON, D. C., February 25, 1906.




                  RECEPTION TO THE PRESIDENT-GENERAL.


A brilliant event under the patronage of the Society took place in New
York City on April 26, 1906. The occasion was a reception to Admiral
John McGowan, U. S. N., the newly-elected president-general. The
exercises took place in the residence of the Hon. John D. Crimmins, and
will long be remembered by the large assemblage participating. Admiral
McGowan resides in Washington, D. C., and the reception was held in
order to give him and the members of the Society an opportunity to
exchange mutual greetings.

The reception was participated in by judges, prominent clergymen,
distinguished members of the medical, law, journalistic and other
professions, as well as by leading bankers and gentlemen prominent in
mercantile life.

Admiral McGowan received in the magnificent drawing-room of Mr.
Crimmins’ home, the introductions being made by Mr. Crimmins, who was
assisted by Thomas Hamilton Murray of Boston, the national secretary of
the Society.

The following is a copy of the notice sent to each member:


                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

  RECEPTION TO REAR-ADMIRAL JOHN MCGOWAN, U. S. N., PRESIDENT-GENERAL.

  _Dear Sir_: It gives me great pleasure to notify you that a
  reception to Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N., President-General
  of our Society, will take place in New York City on Thursday
  evening, April 26, 1906, at 8 o’clock.

  Owing to the kindness of our fellow member, the Hon. John D.
  Crimmins, the reception will be held at the home of the latter, 40
  East 68th Street, and it is hoped that every member of the Society
  who possibly can will be present on this occasion.

  Few events under the auspices of the organization will possess as
  much interest as this, and all who participate in the forthcoming
  reception to our President-General will find it a red-letter event
  in the history of the Society. Each member is at liberty to invite a
  friend to accompany him to the exercises.

  Kindly inform the Secretary, upon receipt of this notice, whether
  you will attend the reception, as it is desirable to know,
  approximately, how many will be present.

                              Fraternally,
                                  THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,
                                                  _Secretary-General._

  36 NEWBURY STREET, BOSTON, MASS.,
    April 5, 1906.

Among those present from New York City, were: Hon. James Fitzgerald, a
justice of the New York Supreme Court; Hon. Edward F. O’Dwyer, chief
justice of the New York City court; Hon. Samuel Adams, Robert E.
Danvers, M. E. Bannin, Richard Deeves, John J. Rooney, William F. Clare,
M. J. Drummond, Cyril Crimmins, J. Henry Haggerty, Nathaniel Doyle, Col.
James Quinlan, formerly of Meagher’s Irish Brigade; Sylvester J.
O’Sullivan, James O’Flaherty, Robert T. Dyas, Edward J. McGuire, John W.
Donovan, Dr. Hugh M. Cox, Henry Wright, Rev. Dr. Henry A. Brann, John A.
Brann, John Jay Joyce, Willis B. Dowd, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Charles McCready,
William J. Broderick, J. J. Hickey, W. E. Callahan, Charles V. Halley,
J. H. Rohan, John J. Ryan, Thomas S. Lonergan, John O’Sullivan, Owen J.
Brady, James J. Phelan, and other people of note.

Present from other places were: Rt. Rev. Mgr. William Byrne, D. D., V.
G., Boston, Mass.; Rt. Rev. Arthur J. Teeling, D. D., Lynn, Mass.; Rev.
Gerald P. Coghlan, Philadelphia, Pa.; Hon. P.T. Barry, Chicago, Ill.;
Hon. Patrick Garvan, Hartford, Conn.; James L. O’Neill, Elizabeth, N.
J.; Hon. Thomas Z. Lee, Providence, R. I.; Thomas A. O’Gorman,
Providence; John F. O’Connell, Providence; Dr. J. F. Hayes, Waterbury,
Conn.; P. F. Magrath, Binghamton, N. Y.; James J. Higgins, Elizabeth, N.
J.; City Clerk Kenah, Elizabeth; Hon. P. J. Ryan, Elizabeth; John
Moriarty, Waterbury, Conn.; Prof. J. E. Madigan, Waterbury; Philip A.
Curran, Waterbury; William M. Sweeny, Astoria, L. I., N. Y., a son of
the late Gen. Thomas W. Sweeny; Dr. A. J. Anderson, Astoria, L. I., N.
Y.; Fire Commissioner Cox, Elizabeth, N. J.; Dr. John D. Hanrahan,
Rutland, Vt.; William P. Connery, Lynn, Mass., and a number of others.

Letters expressing interest in the occasion, and regretting inability to
be present, were received from Hon. Joseph T. Lawless, Norfolk, Va.;
Hon. Thomas H. Carter, Washington, D. C.; Hon. Andrew C. Smith, M. D.,
Portland, Ore.; Hon. Patrick Egan, New York City; Hon. Edward A.
Moseley, Washington, D. C.; Hon. M. T. Moloney, Ottawa, Ill.; Hon.
Franklin M. Danaher, Albany, N. Y.; Rt. Rev. Thomas J. Conaty, D. D.,
Los Angeles, Cal.; Rt. Rev. Mgr. D. J. O’Connell, S. T. D., Washington,
D. C.; Brig-Gen. Michael Cooney, U. S. A. (retired), Washington, D. C.;
Rev. John J. McCoy, LL. D., Worcester, Mass.; John J. Lenehan, New York
City; William Doogue, Boston, Mass.; James A. Fogarty, New Haven, Conn.;
Michael J. Ward, Brookline, Mass.; William Lyman, New York City; James
Connolly, Coronado, Cal.; M. P. O’Connor, Binghamton, N. Y.; R. J.
Donahue, Ogdensburg, N. Y.; James G. Hickey, Boston, Mass.; Patrick H.
Garrity, Waterbury, Conn.; P. C. Walsh, Jr., Newark, N. J.; Rev. M. J.
Cooke, Fall River, Mass.; F. L. Dunne, Boston, Mass.; J. J. O’Connor,
Elmira, N. Y.; J. T. Gibbons, New Orleans, La.; Maurice O’Meara, New
York City; Rev. J. C. Harrington, Lynn, Mass.; D. H. Tierney, Waterbury,
Conn.; Rev. D. W. Fitzgerald, Penacook (Concord), N. H.; Dr. J. E.
Sullivan, Providence, R. I.; W. H. Mahony, New York City; Gustav W.
Lembeck, Jersey City, N. J.; Myles Tierney, New York City; Roger G.
Sullivan, Manchester, N. H.; Richard W. Meade, New York City; John L.
Carroll, Newark, N. J.; W. J. O’Hagan, Charleston, S. C.; James McMahon,
New York City; John C. Griffin, Skowhegan, Me.; Stephen Farrelly, New
York City; M. J. Morkan, Hartford, Conn.; Osborne Howes, Boston, Mass.;
James W. Kenney, Boston, Mass.; P. J. Byrnes, New York City; Frank S.
O’Neil, Binghamton, N. Y.; D. H. McBride, New York City; Rev. J. P.
McCaughan, Warren, Mass.; Hon. George J. Gillespie, New York City; J. A.
O’Keefe, Lynn, Mass.; Laurence Clancy, Oswego, N. Y., and Patrick J.
Lawlor, Waterbury, Conn.

The company inspected Mr. Crimmins’ splendid library and his costly
collections of rare old manuscripts and original letters. Among the
latter were notes written by Washington, Adams, Calhoun, Jackson,
Jefferson, Carroll, and other historic personages.

Among the Washington letters was one in which the father of his country
mentions his contemplated purchase of an Irish wolfdog, on the
recommendation of Lafayette. In a letter by Andrew Jackson occurs this
sentence: “For you know my parents were Irish.” This very effectually
disposes of those who have classed Jackson as “Scotch-Irish.”

Attention was called to Cyrus Townsend Brady’s new work, _The True
Andrew Jackson_, which is dedicated to Mr. Crimmins and the
American-Irish Historical Society, Doctor Brady being a member of the
latter. Much interest was also displayed in a new volume by Mr. Crimmins
himself, entitled _Irish-American Historical Miscellany_, which has
recently been brought out. It is a volume of some five hundred pages and
is replete with interesting data.

After the exercises in the drawing-room, lunch was served, and was
followed by addresses, readings and musical selections. The whole
occasion was one of unusual interest.




                        SOME HISTORICAL PAPERS.




   PATRIOTS BEARING IRISH NAMES WHO WERE CONFINED ABOARD THE _JERSEY_
                              PRISON SHIP.

            BY THE HON. JOHN D. CRIMMINS, NEW YORK CITY.[1]

Footnote 1:

  From Mr. Crimmins’ recent book, _Irish-American Historical
  Miscellany_. (New York, 1905.)


The horrors of the _Jersey_ prison ship have often been told. The
_Jersey_ and other hulks, used by the British, were anchored near the
Wallabout, Brooklyn, N. Y. Many thousands of prisoners perished on these
ships by cruelty and disease. The conduct of their captors was inhumane
and dastardly. It is not surprising, therefore, that the mortality was
so great.

William Burke, a prisoner aboard the _Jersey_, at one time, has left a
record in which he states that he was confined on the ship fourteen
months, and that he saw, among other cruelties, many American prisoners
put to death by the bayonet. This cruel treatment was never relaxed by
the English or Scots, but sometimes the more humane Hessians evinced
pity for the unfortunate sufferers. Burke says:

“During that period, among other cruelties which were committed, I have
known many of the American prisoners put to death by the bayonet: in
particular, I well recollect, that it was the custom on board the ship
for but one prisoner at a time to be admitted on deck at night, besides
the guards or sentinels. One night, while the prisoners were many of
them assembled at the grate at the hatchway, for the purpose of
obtaining fresh air, and waiting their turn to go on deck, one of the
sentinels thrust his bayonet down among them, and in the morning
twenty-five of them were found wounded, and stuck in the head, and dead
of the wounds they had thus received. I further recollect that this was
the case several mornings, when sometimes five, sometimes six, and
sometimes eight or ten, were found dead by the same means.”

It is estimated that over eleven thousand prisoners perished, from all
causes, aboard these ships during the Revolution. The dead would be
carried ashore and carelessly buried in the sand, their bodies, in many
cases, to be uncovered by returning tides. For many years after, the
bones of these martyrs were visible along the shore.

About 1801, John Jackson sold to the United States, through Francis
Childs, a middleman, forty acres of the Wallabout for $40,000. About
this time large numbers of Irish refugees arrived and located in New
York and Brooklyn. They bought some land of Jackson at, or near, the
Wallabout, the settlement being named “Vinegar Hill.”

During the summer of 1805, a Mr. Aycrigg, shocked at the exposed remains
of the prison-ship victims, made a contract with an Irishman residing at
Wallabout, to “collect all the human bones as far as may be without
digging,” and deliver the same to him. This was done, and these bones
were a portion of those interred in the vault patriotically erected by
Tammany.

Among the patriots imprisoned aboard the _Jersey_ were a great many
Irish. In 1888, the Society of Old Brooklynites published a pamphlet
dealing with the _Jersey_, and giving the names of several thousand
persons who had been confined therein, many of whom perished. A copy of
this pamphlet is in the possession of the New York Historical Society.
From that authoritative source we have compiled the following list of
patriots, bearing Irish names, who were confined on the _Jersey_:

 Barry, Samuel
 Black, James
 Black, John
 Black, Philip
 Black, Timothy
 Blake, James
 Boyle, John
 Brady, John
 Broderick, William
 Brown, Michael
 Brown, Patrick
 Bryan, Edward
 Bryan, John
 Bryan, Mathew
 Bryan, William
 Buckley, Cornelius
 Buckley, Daniel
 Buckley, Francis
 Buckley, John
 Burk, Thomas
 Burke, James
 Burke, William
 Burn, William
 Burns, Edward
 Burns, John
 Butler, Daniel
 Butler, Francis
 Butler, James
 Butler, John
 Byrnes, Hugh
 Cain, David
 Cain, Thomas
 Callaghan, Daniel
 Campbell, Philip
 Cannady, James
 Cannady, William
 Carney, Anthony
 Carney, Hugh
 Carr, William
 Carolin, Joseph
 Carrall, Robert
 Carroll, James
 Carroll, John
 Carroll, Michael
 Casey, Edward
 Casey, Richard
 Casey, William
 Christie, James
 Cochran, James
 Cogan, Thomas
 Coleman, David
 Collins, James
 Collins, John
 Collins, Joseph
 Collohan, Daniel
 Connell, John
 Connelly, John
 Conner, George
 Conner, James
 Conner, John
 Conner, Robert
 Conner, William
 Connolly, Patrick
 Connolly, Samuel
 Connor, John
 Conway, John
 Conway, Thomas
 Corrigan, Bernard
 Corrigan, John
 Cox, Joseph
 Cox, William
 Crane, Philip
 Cullen, William
 Cunningham, Bartholomew
 Cunningham, Cornelius
 Cunningham, James
 Cunningham, Joseph
 Cunningham, William
 Curry, Anthony
 Curry, William
 Dailey, Patrick
 Daily, James
 Daily, William
 Darcey, W.
 Daunivan, William
 Delany, Edward
 Doherty, John
 Doherty, Thomas
 Donalin, Nicholas
 Donogan, John
 Dorgan, Patrick
 Dorgan, Timothy
 Dowling, Henry
 Downey, John
 Downing, Peter
 Doyle, Peter
 Doyle, William
 Dring, Thomas
 Duffy, Thomas
 Dunn, Peter
 Durphey, Patrick
 Dwyer, John
 Dwyer, Timothy
 Dyer, Patrick
 Fallen, Thomas
 Filler, Patrick
 Finagan, Bartholomew
 Finn, Dennis
 Finn, John
 Fitzgerald, Edward
 Fitzgerald, Patrick
 Flinn, John
 Ford, Bartholomew
 Ford, Daniel
 Ford, Martin
 Ford, Philip
 Fox, William
 Fury, John
 Gallager, Andrew
 Gallaspie, John
 Goff, Patrick
 Grogan, John
 Griffin, Joseph
 Griffin, Peter
 Haggarty, James
 Hallahan, James
 Halley, John
 Hanagan, James
 Hanagan, Stephen
 Hand, Joseph
 Hanegan, John
 Hanes, Patrick
 Hart, Cornelius
 Hart, John
 Hayes, John
 Hayes, Thomas
 Hays, Patrick
 Hensey, Patrick
 Higgins, George
 Higgins, William
 Hogan, Roger
 Hogan, Stephen
 Hughes, John
 Hughes, Joseph
 Hughes, Peter
 Hughes, Thomas
 Jordan, John
 Jordan, Peter
 Joyce, John
 Kane, Barney
 Kane, Edward
 Kane, John
 Kane, Patrick
 Kane, Thomas
 Kelley, John
 Kelley, Michael
 Kelley, Oliver
 Kelley, Patrick
 Kelley, William
 Kelly, Hugh
 Kelly, James
 Kelly, John
 Kelly, John K.
 Kennedy, James
 Kennedy, William
 Kenney, John
 Lafferty, Dennis
 Lally, Sampson
 Lane, William
 Larkin, Thomas
 Leary, Cornelius
 Lee, Peter
 Loggard, Patrick
 Loney, Peter
 Lowery, John
 Lynch, Timothy
 Lyon, Peter
 Lyons, Daniel
 Lyons, Michael
 Macguire, Anthony
 Malone, John
 Marley, James
 Martin, Daniel
 Martin, James
 Martin, John
 Martin, Michael
 Martin, Joseph
 Martin, Philip
 Martin, Thomas
 Maxfield, Patrick
 Maxwell, James
 Maxwell, William
 McCampsey, Mathew
 McCanery, John
 McCann, Edward
 McCarty, Andrew
 McCarty, Cornelius
 McCarty, William
 McCash, John M.
 McClain, Francis
 McClanegan, James
 McClavey, Daniel
 McClemens, Patrick
 McCloskey, Patrick
 McCloud, Murphy
 McCloud, Peter
 McClure, James
 McClure, William
 McConnell, James
 McCormac, Hugh
 McCormick, James
 McCormick, John
 McCowen, William
 McCoy, George
 McCoy, Peter
 McCoy, Samuel
 McCrea, Roderick
 McCrady, John
 McCulla, Patrick
 McCullough, William
 McCullum, Patrick
 McDaniel, James
 McDaniel, John
 McDavid, John
 McDermott, William
 McDonald, John
 McDonald, William
 McDonough, Patrick
 McEvin, John
 McFall, James
 McFarland, Daniel
 McGandy, William
 McGee, John
 McGerr, James
 McGill, Arthur
 McGill, James
 McGinness, Henry
 McGinnis, James
 McGoggin, John
 McGowen, James
 McHenry, Barnaby
 McKay, Patrick
 McKenney, James
 McKeon, Thomas
 McLain, Edward
 McLaughlin, Philip
 McLaughlin, Peter
 McLayne, Daniel
 McMichal, James
 McNamee, Francis
 McNeal, John
 McNeil, James
 McNeil, William
 McQueen, William
 McQuillian, Charles
 McWaters, Samuel
 Melone, William
 Mungen, Michael
 Mitchell, Anthony
 Mitchell, James
 Mitchell, John
 Molloy, James
 Morgan, Thomas
 Montgomery, James
 Montgomery, John
 Moore, James
 Moore, Joseph
 Moore, Patrick
 Moore, Thomas
 Mooney, Hugh
 Morris, Andrew
 Morris, James
 Morris, John
 Muckelroy, Philip
 Mullen, Jacob
 Mullin, Robert
 Mullin, William
 Mulloy, Edward
 Mulloy, Francis
 Mulloy, Silvanus
 Murphy, Daniel
 Murphy, John
 Murphy, Patrick
 Murphy, Thomas
 Murray, Bryan
 Murray, Charles
 Murray, Daniel
 Murray, John
 Murray, Thomas
 Murray, William
 Neville, Francis
 Neville, Michael
 Norton, John
 Norton, Nicholas
 Norton, Peter
 O’Brien, Cornelius
 O’Brien, Edward
 O’Brien, John
 O’Bryen, William
 O’Hara, Patrick
 O’Neil, John
 Orsley, Patrick
 Power, Patrick
 Power, Stephen
 Powers, Richard
 Quinn, Samuel
 Reed, John
 Rafferty, Patrick
 Regan, Julian
 Reid, Hugh
 Reynolds, Thomas
 Riley, James
 Riley, Philip
 Riordan, Daniel
 Roach, Joseph
 Roach, Lawrence
 Rowe, William
 Rowland, Patrick
 Ryan, Frank
 Ryan, Jacob
 Ryan, Michael
 Ryan, Peter
 Ryan, Thomas
 Sullivan, John
 Sullivan, Parks
 Sweeney, John
 Thompson, Patrick
 Tobin, Thomas
 Toy, Thomas
 Tracy, Benjamin
 Tracy, Nathaniel
 Twoomey, Dailey
 Walsh, Patrick
 Ward, Francis
 Waters, Thomas
 Welch, James
 Welch, Mathew
 Welch, Robert
 Welsh, David
 Welsh, John
 Wen, Patrick
 Whelan, Michael
 Wilson, Patrick

Many other Irish names could be added, but sufficient have been given to
establish the fact that a large number of the sons of Erin were among
those who suffered the rigors of the _Jersey_ prison ship.

Capt. Thomas Dring, who was a prisoner aboard the _Jersey_, tells us in
his _Recollections_ many startling facts about that terrible ship. He
says: “Silence was a stranger to our dark abode. There were continual
noises during the night. The groans of the sick and dying; the curses
poured out by the weary and exhausted upon our inhuman keepers; the
restlessness caused by the suffocating heat and the confined and
poisonous air, mingled with the wild and incoherent ravings of delirium,
were the sounds which, every night, were raised around us in all
directions.”

And another writer states that the lower hold, and the orlop deck, were
such a terror that no man would venture down into them. Dysentery,
smallpox and yellow fever broke out, and “while so many were sick with
raging fever, there was a loud cry for water; but none could be had
except on the upper deck, and but one was allowed to ascend at a time.
The suffering then from the rage of thirst during the night, was very
great. Nor was it at all times safe to attempt to go up. Provoked by the
continual cry to be allowed to ascend, when there was already one on
deck, the sentry would push them back with his bayonet.”

Stiles in his _History of the City of Brooklyn_, narrates a scene that
took place on the _Jersey_, July 4, 1782. He says: “A very serious
conflict with the guard occurred ... in consequence of the prisoners
attempting to celebrate the day with such observances and amusements as
their condition permitted. Upon going on deck in the morning, they
displayed thirteen little national flags in a row upon the booms, which
were immediately torn down and trampled under the feet of the guard,
which on that day happened to consist of Scotchmen. Deigning no notice
of this, the prisoners proceeded to amuse themselves with patriotic
songs, speeches and cheers, all the while avoiding whatever could be
construed into an intentional insult of the guard; which, however, at an
unusually early hour in the afternoon, drove them below at the point of
the bayonet, and closed the hatches. Between decks, the prisoners now
continued their singing, etc., until about nine o’clock in the evening.
An order to desist not having been promptly complied with, the hatches
were suddenly removed and the guards descended among them, with lanterns
and cutlasses in their hands. Then ensued a scene of terror. The
helpless prisoners, retreating from the hatchways as far as their
crowded condition would permit, were followed by the guards, who
mercilessly hacked, cut, and wounded everyone within their reach; and
then ascending again to the upper deck, fastened down the hatches upon
the poor victims of their cruel rage, leaving them to languish through
the long, sultry summer night, without water to cool their parched
throats, and without lights by which they might have dressed their
wounds. And to add to their torment, it was not until the middle of the
next forenoon that the prisoners were allowed to go on deck and slake
their thirst, or to receive their rations of food, which, that day, they
were obliged to eat uncooked. _Ten corpses_ were found below on the
morning which succeeded that memorable fourth of July, and many others
were badly wounded.”

An especially affecting incident is told regarding one prisoner, who
died on the ship: “Two young men, brothers, belonging to a rifle corps,
were made prisoners and sent on board the _Jersey_. The elder took the
fever and, in a few days, became delirious. One night (his end was fast
approaching) he became calm and sensible, and lamenting his hard fate
and the absence of his mother, begged for a little water. His brother,
with tears, entreated the guard to give him some, but in vain. The sick
youth was soon in his last struggles, when his brother offered the guard
a guinea for an inch of candle, only that he might see him die. Even
this was denied. ‘Now,’ said he, drying up his tears, ‘if it please God
that I ever regain my liberty, I’ll be a most bitter enemy!’ He regained
his liberty, rejoined the army, and when the war ended he had _eight
large and one hundred and twenty-seven small_ notches on his rifle
stock.”

The Pennsylvania _Packet_, September 4, 1781, published a letter from
the _Jersey_, which said: “We bury six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and
eleven men in a day; we have two hundred more sick and falling sick
every day.” This will illustrate the terrible mortality aboard the ship.

In his _Recollections of Brooklyn and New York in 1776_, Johnson says of
the prisoners dying on the _Jersey_: “It was no uncommon thing to see
five or six dead bodies brought on shore in a single morning, when a
small excavation would be dug at the foot of the hill, the bodies be
thrown in and a man with a shovel would cover them by shovelling sand
down the hill upon them. Many were buried in a ravine of the hill; some
on the farm. The whole shore, from Rennie’s Point to Mr. Remsen’s
dooryard was a place of graves; as were also the slope of the hill near
the house ...; the shore from Mr. Ramsen’s barn along the mill pond, to
Rapelje’s, and the sandy island between the floodgates and the mill-dam,
while a few were buried on the shore on the east side of the Wallabout.
Thus did _Death_ reign _here_, from 1776 until the peace. The whole
Wallabout was a sickly place during the war. The atmosphere seemed to be
charged with foul air from the prison ships, and with the effluvia of
the dead bodies washed out of their graves by the tides. We believe that
more than half of the dead buried on the outer side of the mill-pond,
were washed out by the waves at high tide, during northeasterly winds.
The bones of the dead lay exposed along the beach, drying and bleaching
in the sun, and whitening the shore, till reached by the power of a
succeeding storm; as the agitated waters receded, the bones receded with
them into the deep.... We have, ourselves, examined many of the skulls
lying on the shore. From the teeth, they appeared to be the remains of
men in the prime of life.”

“The _Jersey_ at length,” declares Stiles, “became so crowded, and the
increase of disease among the prisoners so rapid, that even the hospital
ships were inadequate for their reception. In this emergency, bunks were
erected on the larboard side of the upper deck of the _Jersey_ for the
accommodation of the sick between decks. The horrors of the old hulk
were now increased a hundred-fold. Foul air, confinement, darkness,
hunger, thirst, the slow poison of the malarious locality in which the
ship was anchored, the torments of vermin, the suffocating heat
alternating with cold and, above all, the _almost total absence of
hope_, performed their deadly work unchecked. ‘The whole ship, from her
keel to the taffrail, was equally affected, and contained pestilence
sufficient to desolate a world—disease and death were wrought into her
very timbers.’”

“There was, indeed,” Stiles remarks, “one condition upon which these
hapless sufferers might have escaped the torture of this slow but
certain death, and that was enlistment into the British service. This
chance was daily offered them by the recruiting officers who visited the
ship, but their persuasions and offers were almost invariably treated
with contempt, and that, too, by men who fully expected to die where
they were. In spite of their untold physical sufferings, which might
well have shaken the resolution of the strongest; in spite of the
insinuations of the British that they were neglected by their
government—insinuations which seemed to be corroborated by the very
facts of their condition; in defiance of threats of even harsher
treatment, and regardless of promises of food and clothing—objects most
tempting to men in their condition; but few, comparatively, sought
relief from their woes by the betrayal of their honor. And these few
went forth into liberty followed by the execrations and undisguised
contempt of the suffering heroes whom they left behind. It was this
calm, unfaltering, unconquerable spirit of patriotism—defying torture,
starvation, loathsome disease, and the prospect of a neglected and
forgotten grave—which sanctifies to every American heart the scene of
their suffering in the Wallabout, and which will render the sad story of
the ‘prison ships’ one of ever-increasing interest to all future
generations.”

The corner-stone of a vault for the reception of so many of the bones of
the martyred dead as could be collected, was laid in April, 1808, by
Tammany. The event was made the occasion of a great demonstration. There
was a big military and civic parade, artillery salutes and other
features. Major Aycrigg was marshal of the day and an eloquent oration
was delivered by Joseph D. Fay of Tammany. On May 26, 1808, the vault
being completed, the bones were removed thereto, the event being
signalized by another great demonstration. There were thirteen coffins
filled with bones of the dead, and 104 veterans of the Revolution acted
as pall-bearers. Stiles informs us that “The procession, after passing
through various streets, reached the East River, where, at different
places, boats had been provided for crossing to Brooklyn. Thirteen large
open boats transported the thirteen tribes of the Tammany Society, each
containing one tribe, one coffin, and the pall-bearers.” The scene was
most inspiring. “At Brooklyn ferry the procession formed again ... and
arrived at the tomb of the martyrs amidst a vast and mighty assemblage.
A stage had been here erected for the orator, trimmed with black crape.
The coffins were placed in front, and the pall-bearers took their seats
beneath the eye of the orator. There was an invocation by Rev. Ralph
Williston, and the orator of the day was Dr. Benjamin DeWitt. The
coffins were huge in size and each bore the name of one of the thirteen
original states.”




               COMMERCE BETWEEN IRELAND AND RHODE ISLAND.

                BY THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY, BOSTON, MASS.


Including Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island has a long extent of coast
line. There are in the state 90,000 acres of safe anchorage, varying in
depth from six feet to twenty fathoms. The state has the Atlantic Ocean
as its southern boundary. Of its cities and towns some twenty border on
deep, salt water. It is not surprising, therefore, that Rhode Island
early attained maritime importance.

For many years ships were sent all over the world from Providence,
Warren, Bristol and Newport. Their sails whitened many seas. These Rhode
Island mariners were a hardy race and worthy of the great merchants for
whom they sailed.

Before the year 1700, their vessels had already become numerous. In due
time they were known in Barbadoes, Jamaica, St. Kitt’s, Nevis,
Montserrat and Bermuda. Their sailors cheerily sang in the ports of
Madeira, Fayal, Surinam and Curaçao, and were welcomed even in India and
China.

The slave trade was the object of some of these voyages, commerce of
others, while the fisheries engaged the attention of the rest. In 1738,
Newport alone had over one hundred vessels engaged in business
throughout the world. In 1763, the same place sent out 182 vessels on
foreign voyages in addition to the 352 coastwise and fishing vessels.
These were manned, all told, by 2,200 seamen. In June and July, 1774,
the vessels arriving at Newport from foreign voyages numbered 64, in
addition to 132 coastwise and 17 whalers.

Providence was also a great port. An address to Congress, in 1790,
stated that there “is a greater number of vessels belonging to this port
(Providence) than to New York,” and that “it is a place of more
navigation than any of its size in the Union.” Fortunes were rapidly
made by merchants engaged in the foreign trade, while domestic commerce
also brought in its wealth. In reaching out to trade with the world
Rhode Island merchants, unlike some “historians” of today, did not
forget Ireland.

Several Rhode Island vessels made regular voyages to and from Irish
ports. Others made occasional ones, or touched at Belfast, Newry,
Dublin, Londonderry, Cork or Waterford, on their way to or from British
and other ports. A list of fifteen vessels engaged regularly or
occasionally in the Irish trade, is here given: Ships, _Hope_, _Mary_,
_Neptune_, _Tristram_, _Nancy_, _Robert Burns_, _Catherine_ and
_Faithful Stewart_; brigs, _Little John_, _Betsy_, _Recovery_, _Sally_,
_Lydia_ and _Happy Return_; schooner, _Mayflower_. There were probably
many others, but these fifteen are sufficient to illustrate the point.

Among the captains were Rathbun, Davis, Ambrose, Taggart, Dring, Warner,
Crawford, Staples, Coffin, Noyes, Allen, Smith, Cook, McCansland,
Coggeshall and Howland.

Of the foregoing vessels, the _Mary_ and _Little John_ belonged to
George Gibbs of Newport; the _Hope_ to Samuel Fowler of Newport; the
_Betsy_ to Charles Handy and the _Recovery_ to Chris. Ellery, both also
of Newport. These five vessels are specifically mentioned in the
_Newport Historical Magazine_ as making regular voyages to Ireland. From
time to time the Newport _Mercury_ chronicles the arrival from Ireland,
or departure therefor, of other ships and brigs. These were all in
addition to those sailing between Ireland and Providence.

Among the articles imported from Ireland to Rhode Island at various
times, were linen and woolen goods, Irish poplins, cambrics, lawns,
silks, hosiery, sheetings, etc. Irish butter, beef and other food
products, were also imported. The Newport _Mercury_, August 3, 1772,
contains an advertisement in which, among other things, “Irish beef” is
announced for sale. In the Providence _Gazette_, November 20, 1762,
appears the following:

“By the Newport packet from New York, we are informed, for certain, that
there are 2000 Firkins of the Best Irish Rose butter, arrived there.—A
quantity of it is expected to be imported into this town, which we are
confident will fall the price of that commodity.” Under date of December
25, 1762, the _Gazette_ says: “Since our last, we hear that a vessel has
arrived at Newport from Ireland, with 1300 Firkins of butter—Captain
Champlain, the master of her, died soon after he came out.” In December,
1764, a vessel from Ireland mistook her bearings and went ashore on
Block Island. The following notice of the disaster was published in the
_Gazette_, January 12, 1765:

“On the 25th of last month, in the day time, a large double-decked brig,
loaded with beef, pork, butter, and candles, bound from Ireland to
Halifax run ashore on the north part of Block Island, where she soon
beat to pieces; the people were all saved except the boatswain, who
perished on the deck, which he would not be permitted to quit with the
rest.—About 500 barrels of the cargo, with some other articles, were
also saved. The master’s name we cannot learn.”

The name of the wrecked brig is believed to have been the _Golden
Grove_. Her Irish cargo was in the nature of supplies for the British
garrison at Halifax. The fact that the cargo consisted of beef, pork,
butter and candles, indicate that those articles were exported from
Ireland in considerable quantities at that period.

Speaking of this wreck, recalls the fact that in 1763, the year before,
a Rhode Island vessel was stranded on the Irish coast. She was the
_Samuel and Joseph_, Captain Brown, bound for Amsterdam. In November and
December, 1766, the Providence _Gazette_ contained this advertisement:


                              FOR BELFAST,

                                THE SHIP

  Catherine, Thomas Allen, commander; Takes in her cargo at Newport,
  and will be ready to sail by the 12^{th} Day of January.—For freight
  or passage, apply to said Captain on board or to Mr. Benjamin
  Greene, in Newport.

  PROVIDENCE, Nov. 7, 1766.

June 15, 1772, the Newport _Mercury_ notes the arrival at Newport of
“the brig _Joseph_, Captain Pie, bound to New York in 49 days from
Waterford in Ireland.” July 19, 1773, the same paper states that “Last
Thursday arrived the brig _Sally_, Capt. John Murphy, in 30 days from
Jamaica.” She brought several passengers. This was probably the _Sally_
that at another time is mentioned as having reached Dublin under Captain
Davis. The Providence _Gazette_, February 24, 1776, has this interesting
note: “Arrived from Ireland, but last from Barbadoes, the sloop _N.
York_ packet, Capt. John Freers, who informs that the people in Ireland
and Barbadoes are very warm in the cause of America.” The _Gazette_ also
published the following:


                            FOR LONDONDERRY,

                                THE SHIP

                           FAITHFUL STEWART,

                         _Captain McCausland_:

  Will sail from Newport in ten days.—For Passage apply to Messieurs
  Clark and Nightingale, in Providence, or the Captain on board.

  PROVIDENCE, Jan. 29, 1785.

Special attention is called to the fact that “passage” is advertised in
connection with these voyages. This is good evidence that passengers
sailed direct for Rhode Island from Ireland. Some of these were probably
merchants or their agents engaged in the Irish trade. The fact that such
accommodations were provided, likewise justifies the conclusion that
immigrants also came direct from Ireland to Rhode Island, and in
considerable numbers, too. These immigrants, in all probability, landed,
some in Newport and others in Providence. It may be, too, that Warren,
Bristol, Westerly and other places, likewise received direct Irish
accessions from this source. Further on will be found additional
evidence of direct immigration from Ireland.

Another advertisement in the Providence _Gazette_ reads as follows:


                               FOR DUBLIN

                             THE GOOD SHIP

                               TRISTRAM,

                     _Gideon Crawford, Commander_.

  Now lying at Mrs. Hayley’s Wharff, will sail in 10 or 12 days. For
  Freight or Passage apply to the Master on board or to Joseph and
  William Russell. She has good accommodations for Passengers.

  PROVIDENCE, Jan. 14, 1786.

Here again “passage” is advertised, it will be noted. Soon after a news
item appeared in the _Gazette_, stating that “the ship _Tristram_,
Captain Crawford, sails this day for Dublin.” It appears that the
_Tristram_ made many voyages to and from Ireland. On April 26, 1788,
over two years after the trip just mentioned, the _Gazette_ had the
following budget of marine news:

  The ship Tristram, Capt. Warner, of this port, is arrived at
  Dublin.—The ship Mary, Capt. Rathbun, and Brig Little John, Capt.
  Ambrose, of Newport, are also arrived at Dublin.—The Brig Recovery,
  Capt. Taggart, of Newport, is arrived at Newry.

In June, 1791, Joseph and William Russell of Providence had an
assortment of Irish linens “Just imported in the ship _Tristram_ from
Dublin.” The _Gazette_, under date of Providence, April 13, 1776, says:
“Capt. Cook, from Belfast, informs that recruiting parties had been
beating up there from September till January to reinforce the
ministerial army in America, but they had only inlisted ten men.” This
helps the reader to form a good idea as to the direction of Irish
sympathies at that time.

The quotations in the remainder of this chapter are from the Providence
_Gazette_. A news paragraph, dated Newport, states that on “Monday last
arrived here the ship _Mary_, Captain Ambrose, in fifty-nine days from
Cork.” On February 14, 1789, under the head of Providence, we are told
that “On Wednesday also arrived the brig _Happy Return_, Capt. Dring,
from Dublin, Isle of May, and St. Eustatia.” The _Happy Return_ has
frequent mention, sometimes as arriving from Dublin and again from other
ports. But there came a time when she returned no more. The incident
occurred in 1790, and is thus narrated: “The brig _Happy Return_, Capt.
Dring, of this port (Providence), bound for Dublin, is lost near that
port. The crew and a part of the cargo were saved.” In April, 1790, is
chronicled the arrival at Dublin of the brig _Sally_, Captain Davis, of
Providence, “after a short passage of twenty two days.” In November of
the same year, the ship _Tristram_, Captain Warner, is again mentioned
as having cleared for Dublin from Providence. Among the arrivals in the
port of Providence in May, 1791, was the “ship _Tristram_, Warner,
Dublin.” In November, 1791, the _Tristram_, commanded by Captain
Holowell, departed from Providence for Newry. December 14, 1792, the
brig _Betsy_ left Providence for Newry and in May of the next year, her
arrival at Providence is noted “from Newry, which she left the 5th of
March, having touched at the Cape de Verds.”

In April, 1796, the brig _Lydia_, Capt. John Cook, arrived at Providence
from Cork in forty-nine days. We find it recorded December 21, 1799,
that “A ship from Cork put into Newport on Sunday evening last, and
sailed next morning. She brought Cork papers to the 24th of October.”
Elsewhere it is stated that earlier in that year the ship _Palmyra_,
Captain Trotter, of Providence, for Hamburg, put into “the Cove of
Cork.”

The schooner _Mayflower_ left Providence for Dublin in February, 1801.
In 1809, among the departures from the port of Providence was the “Ship
_Neptune_, Staples, Ireland.” The same year it is stated that the “ship
_Nancy_, of Rhode Island, 14 days from Richmond for Cork, was spoke July
6, lat. 43:52.” In October, 1809, the brig _Orient_ arrived at New York
“53 days from Dublin. Left there among others, ship _Nancy_, Capt.
Noyes, just arrived from Providence.” These Rhode Island captains became
great favorites in Irish ports. They were frequently entertained and
were treated in a hospitable manner generally. In 1811, Capt. Peregrine
Howland of Newport, died in Belfast. He was in his thirty-ninth year at
the time, and his passing away caused much sorrow. The ship _Robert
Burns_, Captain Coffin, arrived at Newport January 3, 1820, “in 39 days
from Ireland.” The ship _George Washington_, of Providence, is noted as
having arrived at Cork March 26, 1820, “from Madeira in 15 days.” She
was commanded by Captain Allen. Under a Newport date of January 6, 1820,
we find the following: “Arrived on Tuesday last, in distress, ship
_William and Jane_, Brown, from N. York, with flaxseed, bound to
Londonderry,—Sailed from N. York, Dec. 24, and next day the ship sprung
a leak, which continued to increase, and was compelled to throw over
part of the cargo, and put into this port.”

It will thus be seen that flaxseed was exported to Ireland from this
country. That is perhaps what Black & Stewart, Irish merchants of
Providence, intended to do with the “2000 bushels of good and well
clean’d flax seed” they advertised for in 1763.

From facts here adduced it will be seen that for a great many years,
until Irish manufacturing industries were crushed by English law,
commercial relations existed between Ireland and Rhode Island. Irish
goods and Irish passengers were landed on the wharves in Newport and
Providence, while outgoing ships took goods and passengers for the old
land. Too long have these facts been forgotten or ignored. But a new era
has dawned and the sun of investigation will yet bring forth even
greater and more interesting developments.




                    IRISH SETTLERS IN PENNSYLVANIA.

                 BY MICHAEL J. O’BRIEN, NEW YORK CITY.


John Burns, a native of the city of Dublin, where he was born in 1730,
was a prominent character in Pennsylvania history. He emigrated to
Philadelphia when quite young. He prospered in business in that city,
where we are told “he took a prominent part in all local and national
questions, and was honored by his fellow-citizens with many positions of
trust.” He was the first governor of Pennsylvania elected after the
adoption of the federal constitution, and “retained in a high degree the
respect and confidence of his fellow-citizens till his death.”

One of the very earliest white settlers in Greene County was Thomas
Hughes, who emigrated from Donegal with his wife, Bridget O’Neill, to
Virginia. One of his descendants, Thomas Hughes, wrote the memoirs of
his family in 1880, in which he said: “The motive that sent our first
ancestor to this country from his native Irish home was of this
character, _i. e._, a desire for religious freedom; he was a devout
Catholic.” “Settling,” he continues, “in the valley of Virginia, in
Loudoun County, before the year 1739, Thomas Hughes, son of Felime or
Felix, and his wife, with his brother Felime or Felix, all from Inver,
in Donegal, Ulster, first laid the foundations of his family in this
country.”

“Thomas Hughes was a noted hunter, and in one of his expeditions into
the backwoods, which lasted for several months, he spent some time in
what is now Greene County, Pennsylvania, the soil and general appearance
of which pleased him so well that he determined to make his future home
there. This he did in 1771, and was one of the very first white settlers
in that country. He located where Carmichaelstown now stands, but
several years afterwards exchanged farms with a party named Carmichael,
and called his new place Jefferson, after his old county in Virginia.”

His nephew, Felix Hughes, also settled in Pennsylvania, where he erected
a fort or blockhouse as protection against the Indians and wild animals.
It was a building of only one story and a half, of hewn logs and rough
boards, and as an instance of the primitiveness of the period when this
Irish pioneer settled in this locality, this building was looked upon as
“an elegant house!” His wife’s name was Cinthia Kaighn (or Kane). In
1780, he set out with others to Kentucky to look up lands, but the party
was attacked by Indians while descending the Ohio and, after a narrow
escape, Hughes returned to Greene County, where he spent the remainder
of his days. He and his father were buried in Neill’s burying ground,
near Carmichaelstown. Their descendants are still found in considerable
numbers in Greene and Fayette counties, Pennsylvania.

A prominent Irish Catholic who settled early on Sherman’s Creek, was
Henry Gass. He and his brother erected log cabins on Indian lands in
Perry County, but were dispossessed from there in 1750, when they
located at Falling Springs.

Patrick Gass, who was born in the latter place in 1771, and who is said
to have been the first white man to make an overland trip to the
Pacific, is presumed to have been a son of Henry Gass. The original
name, of course, was Prendergast.

Among the earlier Irish inhabitants of Carlisle is found the
Prendergrass family, whose name is identified with almost all the larger
settlements west of Carlisle. Kline’s _Carlisle Gazette_ of November 29,
1797, gave an account of the death of the aged Philip Prendergrass,
which occurred two weeks previously, in which it described him as “an
old inhabitant of this borough.” The name is found on the “list of
taxables” in 1762. He took part in the expedition of Kitanning, in 1756,
to repulse the Indians. It was a member of this family, Garrett
Prendergrass who, in February, 1770, purchased the ground now occupied
by the city of Allegheny, from the Six Nations. The old Prendergrass
homestead was near Hanover, and is still occupied by the family. It was
built in the last century by an Irishman names Byrnes, who married into
the family.

Wing’s _History of Cumberland County_ mentions John and Charles McManus,
as settlers in Carlisle in 1762, the latter as “one of the oldest, most
progressive and successful business men in the community.”

“The large and commodious dwelling he erected on East Street,” says
Ganss, one of the historians of Carlisle, “still remains as a monument
of post-colonial massiveness, spaciousness and solidity, with its marble
slab conspicuously placed in the second story, bearing the date of its
erection, 1797, and the name of its builder, and which gives evidence
not only of enterprise and wealth, but cultured taste. Originally, he
was proprietor of one of the largest distilleries in the county, and
amassed a sufficient competence which permitted him to live, if not in
luxury, at least in ease and comfort. After the death of Mrs. Mary
McManus (born 1703, died 1809), the name becomes less prominent,
although that of Charles is still found on the pew list of the Catholic
Church as late as 1823. The descendants drifted to Mexico and
Philadelphia. The former branch of the family, in the course of time,
founded the prosperous and famed banking firm of McManus & Co., an
institution of international reputation and the largest and most
prominent in our sister republic. The Philadelphia family likewise,
achieved more than ordinary success in life.”

Here we have a conspicuous example of the class of men whom Ireland gave
to America in her early days.

John Frazer, who was born at Glassborough, County Monaghan, in 1709,
left Ireland in 1735 and located in Philadelphia. In course of time
he became a very wealthy man. He was a shipping merchant, owning
several vessels engaged in the West Indian trade. He married Mary
Smith, who was born in Cleary, County Monaghan. He died in
Philadelphia in 1765. His son, Patrick Frazer, commanded a company
of the Fourth Pennsylvania, a regiment under the command of Anthony
Wayne. He became lieutenant-colonel of the Fifth Pennsylvania, and
was brigadier-general of Pennsylvania militia. His grandson, Robert
Frazer, was a distinguished lawyer at Thornbury, Pa.

John McCord emigrated from Ireland in 1750, and settled in Sherman’s
Valley, Pa. His father also located at Landisburg, Pa., about the same
time, and on his farm a fort was erected for protection against the
Redmen in the Indian war of 1755. It is still known as McCord’s Fort.

David Milligan came from Ireland to Mifflin County, Pennsylvania, in
1766. He and his two brothers, John and James, served in the Fifth
Battalion of Cumberland Militia through the Revolutionary War. David was
twice taken prisoner. All these were in active service up to 1778. Their
brother, Thomas, and their mother, joined them from Ireland in 1785.

Robert Guthrie, a name Anglicized from McGrath, was born in Derry;
settled with his family in Lancaster County in 1744. His wife’s name was
Brighid Dougherty, a native of Carndonagh, County Donegal. Their son was
a lieutenant-colonel in Colonel Brodhead’s regiment through the
Revolutionary War. He was in the expedition against the Six Nations, and
with Harbison’s company of rangers in the border wars against the
Indians. His great-grandson was mayor of Pittsburg in 1897.

Roger Connor, a native of Cork, settled at Lancaster in 1740. He
established a hat factory there and purchased lands in many parts of the
province, principally in Lancaster, Carlisle and York. He had Irishmen
in his employ, too, and in the Philadelphia _Mercury_ of November 24,
1743, he advertised for “Patrick Dollard, a hatter by trade, aged about
twenty years, a lusty, well-set fellow, etc.” Patrick was a redemptioner
and had left the service of his countryman before his term had expired.
It was Roger Connor who gave the land on which St. Mary’s Church, in
Lancaster, was built. His name appears on the list of subscribers to the
fund for the relief of the sufferers by the Boston massacre in the
Revolution. He died at Lancaster in 1776.

John and Charles Connor also settled in Lancaster about 1740, and are
thought to have been kinsmen of Roger. In 1758, Charles went to
Philadelphia and his name appears on the list of the early contributors
to St. Mary’s Church. He died in 1775 and bequeathed his property to his
nephew, Charles, son of Cornelius O’Connor, of Carrigtwohill, County
Cork.

Another family named Connor lived in Ashton Township, Chester County.
Charles Connor died there in 1750.

Thomas G. Connor, son of another Charles Connor, who was born at
Philadelphia in 1786, is buried in Mount Vernon Cemetery, Philadelphia.
His wife’s name was Martha Fitzgerald.

Morgan Connor, or O’Connor, was one of the early settlers in
Pennsylvania. In the _Pennsylvania Archives_, Vol. X, he is referred to
as “among the first to enter the service of his country as lieutenant in
Captain George Nagle’s company, in Colonel Thompson’s regiment.” After
the campaign of 1775–’76 he was ordered south as a brigade major for
Gen. John Armstrong. He served with credit down to the winter of 1779,
and on his return in that year he became lieutenant-colonel of Hartley’s
regiment and subsequently colonel of the Eleventh Regiment. He was lost
at sea in 1780, on a voyage to the West Indies. According to Volume I,
No. 47, Register of Wills Office, Philadelphia, letters of
administration on O’Connor’s estate were granted to Dennis McCarthy, on
September 8, 1780, when McCarthy, Bryan O’Hara and Patrick Byrne gave a
bond in the sum of £3,000.

In a pamphlet issued by Benjamin Franklin in 1744, entitled, _Plain
Talk, or Serious Considerations on the Present State of the City of
Philadelphia and Province of Pennsylvania_, appears a letter written in
that year by Governor Morris of New Jersey, to Governor Clinton of New
York, in which he said: “There are here a Popish chapel and numbers of
Irish and Germans that are Papists, and I am told that should the French
land 1,500 or 2,000 men, they would in that province soon get ten or
twelve thousands together, which would in that case be not a little
dangerous to these and neighboring colonies.”

Edward McGuire, who belonged to the staff of General McGuire in Austria,
came to Philadelphia in 1751, with wines, in which he had invested his
patrimony. He was the son of Constantine McGuire and Julia MacEllengot
of the County of Kerry. He established himself in business in
Philadelphia, but subsequently went to Alexandria, Va., thence to
Winchester in 1753, where he built a hotel and gave the ground for and
built the Catholic Church at Winchester in 1790. He died in 1806. His
descendants were lawyers, doctors and ministers, some of whom married
into the best old Virginia families.

Acrelius, in his _History of New Sweden_ (as Pennsylvania was sometimes
called prior to the English settlement), writing of 1758, said: “Forty
years back our people scarcely knew what a school was. In the later
times there have come over from Ireland some Presbyterians and some
Roman Catholics, who commenced with school keeping, but as soon as they
saw better openings they gave that up.”

Among the early Philadelphia schoolmasters, the following advertised in
the _Mercury_: Charles Phipps, “from Dublin,” in 1729, and James Conway,
on July 17, 1729. George Brownwell also advertised his school in the
same year. The schoolroom later became a dancing academy, and was opened
by “Theobald Hacket, dancing master, lately come from England and
Ireland.” Alexander Butler advertised his school on November 12, 1741.
On June 21, 1790, John Reilly opened a school at Columbia, and in the
following year his scholars were taken by Francis Dunlevy, who taught
the higher branches. This was continued until 1793, when Reilly gave the
entire school to Dunlevy and opened another school at Mill Creek. It is
stated in the _Magazine of Western History_ for February, 1888, that
this was the first school in the American settlements of the Ohio.

Many of these Irish schoolmasters are mentioned in Wickersham’s _History
of Education in Pennsylvania_.

An Irish schoolmaster taught school at Chester in 1741. Rev. Mr.
Backhouse of that borough, wrote the London Society for Propagation of
the Gospel, that the Quakers had “set up another schoolmaster, one of
their own sort truly, but a native Irish bigoted Papist, in opposition
to one Charles Fortesque.” The name of this Irish schoolmaster is not
mentioned.

John Conly taught “an advanced school” at Byberry, Philadelphia County,
before the Revolutionary War.

John Downey, who was among the first settlers of Harrisburg, according
to Wickersham, taught school at Harrisburg for a number of years. He was
also a justice of the peace, town clerk and member of the Assembly. In
1796, he presented Governor Mifflin a plan for a state system of
education, “in which he discussed the whole subject of education,
showing a wonderful sense of its importance in a government like ours
and a clear conception of the nature of the system necessary to make it
general.”

On May 15, 1767, Miss Mary McAllister advertised in the Philadelphia
papers to open a boarding school for young ladies in that city. “Hers
was the first school of the kind in Philadelphia” (Wickersham).

Thomas Neill was a schoolmaster in the Wyoming Valley before the
massacre of 1778. He is described as “an Irishman of middle age,
learned, a Catholic, a Free Mason, fond of dress, remarkable for his
fine flow of spirits and pleasing manners, a bachelor and a
schoolmaster.” He lost his life in the massacre of Wyoming.

In 1790, a number of Catholics from Maryland settled in Cambria County,
Pennsylvania. “A school was opened there,” says Wickersham, “under the
direction of a schoolmaster named O’Connor.”

Wickersham also states that the pioneer settler of northern Cambria
County was a Captain Maguire. Other settlers who followed him from
Maryland in 1790 were named Kaylor, Burns, McDale and Carroll, the
descendants of the latter having been the founders of the present town
of Carrolltown. The second white child born in that section is said to
have been Michael Maguire. The number of places in Cambria County which
bear Irish names indicate the extent of these Irish settlements. For
instance, Driscoll, Carrolltown, Kaylor, Dale, Dougherty, Sheridan,
Condon and Patton, called after the settlers, and Dysart and Munster,
called after Irish places. Immediately to the north of Cambria, in
Clearfield County, there are places names Mahaffey, McGee, McCartney,
McCauley, Welshdale, Moran, Curryrun, Mitchel, Shawville, Barrett and
Donegal, and in the other counties surrounding Cambria, are places
called Tyrone, Armagh, Avonmore, McKee, Curryville, Kelley, Fleming,
Connor, Daley, Downey, Lavansville, and so on.

James Nowlins taught school at Mauch Chunk. According to Wickersham, he
was one of the first white men who located at that place.

“Paddy” Doyle taught school at Phœnixville. He is mentioned in
Pennypacker’s _Annals of Phœnixville_. A description of him says “his
nationality was revealed by a very decided brogue.”

Robert Williams, an Irishman, was a teacher at Greensburg.

John Sharpless conducted an academy on Second Street, Philadelphia, in
1791.

Rev. S. Magaw opened an academy on Spruce Street in 1800.

Philip Garrett and two other teachers opened a night school at
Philadelphia in 1799, and their advertisement stated it was “for poor
children and would do the teaching themselves.” Two years later their
effort was organized into the “Philadelphia Society for the
Establishment and Support of Charity Schools.”

In the settlement of New Londonderry, Chester County, Samuel Blair, an
Irishman, established a school in 1740. This settlement was founded
fourteen years before by immigrants from Derry and Donegal. Blair is
described in Pennsylvania history as “one of the most able, learned,
pious, excellent and venerable men of his day.” His academy was called
“the school of the prophets,” and “from it there came forth many
distinguished men who did honor to their instructor and their country.”

One of the most eminent educators in the province was Dr. Samuel Finley,
who arrived from Ireland in 1734 and located in Pennsylvania, where he
taught school. In 1744 he founded an academy at Nottingham, Md., where
some of the most distinguished men in the country laid the foundation of
their education and usefulness. Among his many scholars were such men as
Governor Martin of North Carolina, the famous Benjamin Rush of
Philadelphia, his brother, Judge Rush, Governor Henry of Maryland, and
Doctor McWhorter of New Jersey. It is said “there were no better
classical scholars formed anywhere in the county” than in this school.
In 1761, Doctor Finley was appointed president of Princeton College. He
died in 1766.

Dr. Francis Alison, of Donegal, came to Pennsylvania in 1735, and
settled at New London, Chester County, where he opened a school. At the
time of its establishment there was a great want of learning in the
Middle Colonies, and Doctor Alison is said to have instructed all who
came to him “without fee or reward.” A Dr. Patrick Allison, who was born
in Lancaster County in 1740, is thought to have been a relative of the
Donegal schoolmaster. He held a place “in the very first rank of the
American clergy, and had scarcely an equal for his eloquence.”

The father of John W. Geary, governor of Pennsylvania from 1867 to 1873,
was an Irishman who had settled early in Franklin County. He became an
iron manufacturer, but having failed in business and lost his entire
investment in the mines, he opened a select school in Westmoreland
County, to which he devoted the remaining years of his life. His son,
General Geary, commanded a Pennsylvania regiment in the Mexican War, and
was commissioned governor of Kansas in 1856. He fought in the War of the
Rebellion and distinguished himself for his bravery at Gettysburg. “His
name will forever be associated with the great events of the brilliant
Chattanooga campaign.” While in the command at Lookout Mountain, his
son, Capt. Edward Geary, a youth of eighteen, was killed by his side.

William Powers, who was elected a member of the Hibernian Society of
Philadelphia in 1790, is referred to in Campbell’s history of that
society as “a teacher in the university.”

Benjamin Workman, who also joined in the same year, is described as a
teacher of mathematics. He advertised in the _Freeman’s Journal_ on June
28, 1786, as “from the University of Pennsylvania.”

Rev. S. B. Wylie, a native of Moylarg, County Antrim, was a teacher in a
private academy at Philadelphia in 1797, in which year he fled from the
wrath of the British government. He was an early member of the Society
of United Irishmen in Belfast. He became professor of languages in the
University of Pennsylvania and was vice-provost of that institution. He
joined the Hibernian Society in 1811.

William Findlay, who was born in Ireland in 1750, came to Pennsylvania
in August, 1763, and taught school in Westmoreland County for several
years after his arrival. He was elected to the state Legislature from
Westmoreland County, and was a member of Congress from 1791 to 1799, and
again from 1803 to 1817. He was a prominent writer and pamphleteer on
subjects devoted to the public welfare. He was a member of the Hibernian
Society.

Among the members of the Hibernian Society who were elected in 1790,
Francis Donnelly, John Barry, John Heffernan and James Kidd are
described as schoolmasters in Philadelphia.

Patrick Farrall, who joined the Society in 1792, and who is described as
“the first clerk in the office for settling accounts between the United
States and individual states” after independence had been won, is
thought to have been a Pennsylvania schoolmaster.

Andrew Porter, a member of the Hibernian Society, opened “an English and
Mathematical School” in Philadelphia in 1767, in which he taught till
1776, when he was appointed a captain of marines and ordered to the
frigate _Effingham_. He was a son of Robert Porter, who emigrated from
Derry to New Hampshire in 1720, and who afterwards removed to Montgomery
County, Pa. He was transferred from the marine corps to the command of
the Fourth Pennsylvania Artillery, which post he held until the close of
the war. He fought in several battles of the Revolutionary War at the
head of his gallant regiment, and is said to have been personally
commended by Washington for his conduct at the battle of Germantown. He
became general of Pennsylvania militia, and took a prominent part in all
movements for the welfare of his native state. Gov. David R. Porter of
Pennsylvania, Gov. Bryan Porter of Michigan, and James M. Porter,
secretary of war under Tyler, were grandsons of the exile from Derry,
Robert Porter.




                  EARLY IRISH IN ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI.

                     BY FRANCIS J. WARD, ST. LOUIS.


In 1815 the population of St. Louis was 2,000. _Billon’s Annals_ for
1817–’20 states: “The adult male population of that day was about 700.
Of American birth 400, French and Spanish 150, and of foreign birth 150.
Of these, fully two thirds, or about 100, were Irishmen, some fifteen or
twenty European Frenchmen, about the same number English and Scotch, and
some ten or twelve Germans.”

The tax list for 1811 shows Auguste Chouteau as the largest taxpayer,
the Irish-American firm, McKnight & Brady, second. The first directory
of St. Louis (1821) contains 749 names. Of these but few are Germanic.
As late as 1827 there were but twenty-seven German families here.

In 1663 Marquis de Tracy was governor-general of all the French
possessions in America, and another Franco-Irishman, Chevalier McCarthy,
in 1751, was commandant of the French settlement of the Illinois
territory, and in 1769 a native Gael, Alexander O’Reilly, had command
under the Spanish.

Peter Conley appears as a witness to Laclede’s will. Charles Gratiot was
a member of the firm of David McCrae & Co., at Cahokia, from 1771 to
1781. Among the earliest mortgages in St. Louis is that of Pierre
Saffray to Joseph O’Neille. Mathew Kennedy, in 1771, executed a bond to
Antoine Bernard, and in the will of Jan Louis Lambert, a merchant, who
died here in 1771, is found memoranda of an indebtedness due Morrissey &
Co. Both Kennedy and Morrissey were prominent merchants here long prior
to this.

When Patrick Henry, then governor of Virginia, determined to check the
progress of the English on the Western frontier, he gave the command to
the son of an Irishman, Gen. George Rogers Clark. Virginia was unable to
furnish the money to equip Clark’s troops for the Illinois campaign, but
an Irish merchant of New Orleans, Oliver Pollock, borrowed $70,000 from
Count O’Reilly, once commandant of the Louisiana territory. What Morris
did in the East Pollock did in the West for the American cause. To his
financial aid the United States owes the success of Clark’s Illinois
campaign. That Clark had many soldiers of Irish birth in his army is
shown by a deposition taken at Kaskaskia, June 11, 1779, in which are
the names of Andrew McDonald, Aaron Barrett, Patrick Shine, Andrew Coil
and Tarrance Mooney.

The first American who settled in St. Louis after Clark’s surprise of
Kaskaskia, in 1778, was Philip Fine, son of Thomas Fine, an Irish
settler in Virginia. He came in 1781. Kaskaskia was the settling place
of many Irish in the early days, among them being Robert Morrison, an
Irish merchant, who arrived in 1792.

In 1800 occurred the murder of Adam Horne, on the Meramec. The
commandant at Carondelet appointed as witnesses to the inventory John
Cummings and John Donald, the witness to the order being Bartholomew
Harrington.

In 1803 Governor Delassus organized two companies of militia for the
protection of New Madrid, and appointed Richard Waters, captain, and
George K. Reagan, lieutenant of cavalry, and Robert McCoy, captain, and
John Hart, ensign of infantry. William Sullivan obtained the first
tavern license issued in the town after its transfer to the Americans,
and was appointed by General Harrison constable and coroner, holding in
the latter capacity the first inquest. In 1816, when Chouteau laid out
the first addition to the town, Sullivan purchased a half block, on
which he built a residence, where he died.

Immediately after the transfer of the territory, Colonel Delassus
addressed an official note to the new American officials commending,
among others, the following officers who had served under him in the
French service: James Mackay, commandant at St. Andrew, “an officer of
knowledge, zealous and punctual”; also Mr. Mathew McKonel, Robert McKay,
“a brave officer,” and Dr. Samuel Dorsey, surgeon of the fort.

After the transfer came the descendants of Irish settlers of
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Kentucky, the Carolinas and Tennessee, a sturdy,
vigorous, independent and progressive race, to whom President Roosevelt,
himself a descendant on the maternal side, pays tribute in his _Winning
of the West_. The fathers of many of them took part in the Revolutionary
War, others were those who were banished from Ireland through the same
laws that forced Americans to rebel.

Among the latter was Joseph Charless, a native of Westmeath, who sought
his fellow refugees, Mathew Carey and William Duane, in Philadelphia. He
worked as a compositor on Duane’s _Aurora_, and set up for Carey the
first folio edition of the Bible printed in the United States. Shortly
afterward he left for Kentucky, coming later with his printer’s outfit
on mulebacks to St. Louis, where he began the publication of the first
newspaper printed west of the Mississippi, the _Missouri Gazette_, in
1808.

In 1804 came John Mullanphy, the celebrated philanthropist. His third
daughter, Jane, married Charles Chambers, son of John Chambers, a United
Irishman, who, with Thomas Addis Emmet, Dr. William Macneven and
thirteen others, after their release from a political prison, came to
America, where they rose to distinction.

James Rankin was the first sheriff of St. Louis under American rule, and
the first grand jury contains some Irish names, and many transfers of
real estate from early settlers are recorded this year, among them that
of Manuel Lisa to Patrick Cullen and Joseph Bent. Eighteen hundred and
four was the year when the old Fort Bellefontaine was selected for the
establishment of Jefferson Barracks, which, after its abandonment, in
1826, was left in charge of Capt. John Whistler, a native of Ireland,
founder of Fort Dearborn, in 1803, now the city of Chicago, and
grandfather of the famous American artist, James A. McNeil Whistler. He
died in St. Louis in 1829.

This year also saw the departure of Lewis and Clark to the Rocky
Mountains, Clark being a brother to Gen. Rogers Clark. Among the party
were George Shannon, who afterward became United States attorney for
Missouri, and Patrick Gass.

A remarkable Irishman came in 1805—Jeremiah Conners. In 1818 he was the
owner of the 40–arpent lots, on which he laid out Washington Avenue.
Part of his property he donated to Bishop Dubourg, in 1820, for founding
St. Louis University, the first of its kind in St. Louis. At his house
was organized the first Irish society established in the city, in 1818.

William Christy, whose people came from County Down, was also a famous
man. He laid out the whole section known as North St. Louis. Another
large Irish landholder was Patrick McMasters Dillon, who, previous to
leaving Ireland, was involved in the Emmet rising. He laid out several
additions to the city on lands he purchased, his last being “Dillon’s
Fourth Addition,” in 1840, on a tract purchased from Fred Dent,
father-in-law of President Grant. One of his daughters, Martha N.,
married the celebrated Capt. James B. Eads.

Among other large purchasers of real estate in the early years occur the
names of James Mackay, James Conway, Mathew Boyse, John Hogan, Hugh
O’Neill and John Dougherty. A famous lawyer of this time was Col. Luke
E. Lawless, a native of Dublin, who came in 1816, and who, after the
resignation of Judge William C. Carr from the Circuit Court, succeeded
him. Still another was Nathaniel Beverly Tucker. He became judge of the
Circuit Court. One of the family married John Patten Emmet, youngest son
of Thomas Addis Emmet, who was appointed professor of chemistry in the
University of Virginia by Thomas Jefferson, the son of the union being
the celebrated Dr. Thomas Addis Emmet of New York. Another legal
luminary was Hamilton Rowan Gamble, whose people came from Belfast. In
1861 he was chosen provisional governor of the state.

In the first House of Representatives of the territory, S. McGrady
represented Ste. Genevieve. In the legislative council occurs the name
of James Flaugherty. William Neeley became president of the council. The
first state Legislature met in the Missouri Hotel, built by Thomas
Brady, a famous Irishman of his day.

Col. John O’Fallon, son of Dr. James O’Fallon, native of County
Roscommon, surgeon under Washington, came in 1811, and resided with his
uncle, General Clark. The name has become so identified with the history
of the city as to need no mention. Francis Redford opened, in 1804, the
first school for instruction in English. The honor of giving the grounds
for its first seat of learning belongs to a native of the Emerald Isle.
The proud distinction of being called the “Father of the University of
Missouri” belongs to a man whose ancestors came from the County Tyrone,
Dr. James Rollins.

The first bank, the Bank of St. Louis, organized in 1813, had as one of
its commissioners Thomas Brady, and the second, the Bank of Missouri,
had among its directors John McKnight and Mathew Kerr, and the Bank of
the State of Missouri, organized in 1837, had among its directors Hugh
O’Neill, Edward Walsh, Edward Dobyns and John O’Fallon. A branch of the
United States Bank was started in 1819, with John O’Fallon as president.

The Merchants’ Exchange began as a debating Society, in 1836, with
Edward Tracy as president and John Ford as secretary. The Millers’
Association, the first of its kind in the West, was established in 1849,
among the members being John Walsh. Financial exchanges need telegraphic
connections, so along came a Leitrim man, Henry O’Reilly, in 1847, who
opened here the first telegraph office west of the Mississippi.

In military life the men of the “Fighting Race” were to the fore. The
St. Louis Grays, the first volunteer organization, started in 1832, had
for its ensign John P. Riley, but a volunteer company of light infantry
preceded it in 1819, having for its captain Henry W. Conway. Other
companies were added to the Grays in 1842, forming the First Regiment,
St. Louis Legion, among the designations of the companies being
“Montgomery Guards,” with Patrick Gorman, captain; “St. Louis Guards,”
Daniel Byrne, captain; “Mound City Guards,” John H. Barrett, captain;
“Morgan Riflemen,” Henry J. McKillop, captain.

In this review of the “pioneer” Irish in St. Louis, many names
necessarily are omitted. Sufficient to mention men of worth in their
day, such as John C. Sullivan, collector, in 1814; Judge Thomas McGuire,
1817; Captain McGunnegle, the Rankin Brothers, Hugh, Robert and David,
who came hither from Ireland in 1819; Bernard Gillully, who was in
partnership with Edward C. Cummings; James Clemens, Patrick Walsh,
Richard K. Dowling, Thomas Hanley, Thomas M. Doherty, Mayor Ferguson,
William Carr Lane, Bryan Mullanphy, and others.

Such men, indeed, were the “cream of St. Louis society” in the early
part of the nineteenth century.

We hear much of the part played by the Irish in the creation and
maintenance of the American republic in the military sense, but what
they have contributed towards its civil, commercial, manufacturing or
educational development is much overlooked and remains unknown to
readers of the present day.




       SOME IRISH-FRENCH OFFICERS IN THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.[2]

        From “Les Combattants Francais de la Guerre Americaine.”


Footnote 2:

  Published in Paris, 1903.


                          RÉGIMENT DE DILLON.


                             _État-Major._


                               _Colonel._

 Le comte Dillon (Arthur).


                          _Colonel En Second._

 Le chevalier Dillon (Théobald).


                         _Lieutenant-Colonel._

 Dillon (Barthélemy).


                                _Major._

 O’Moran (Jacques).


                      _Quartier-Maitre Tresorier._

 Moncarelly (Barthélemy).


                             _Capitaines._

 Moore (Gerard).
 Purdon (Simon).
 Bancks (Thomas).
 Nugent (Anselme).
 Swigny (Paul).
 Shee (Robert).
 Moore (Guillaume).
 O’Neill (Bernard).
 O’Berin (Michel).
 Taaffe (Laurent).


                        _Capitaines En Second._

 De Mandeville (Jacques).
 Macquire (Philippe).
 Macdermott (Thomas), ainé.
 O’Reilly (Jean).
 Kelly (Guillaume).
 Macdermott (Thomas).
 Novolan (Christophe).
 O’Doyer (Denis).
 Lynck (Isidore).[3]
 Coghlan (Therence).

Footnote 3:

  Possibly intended for Lynch. Some of these attained higher rank during
  the war and after.


                             _Lieutenants._

 Greenlaw (Jean-Bernard).
 Dillon (Thomas).
 O’Keeffe (Patrice).
 O’Farel (Claude).
 De Macdermott (Bernard).
 Welsh (Michel).
 Evin (Nicolas).
 Commerfort (Joseph).
 Browne (Jean).
 Duggan (Jean).


                        _Lieutenants En Second._

 Darcy (Louis).
 Fitz Harris (Guillaume).
 Browne (Thomas).
 Taaffe (Christophe).
 Fennell (Jean).
 Hussey (Jean).

 Le chevalier Whyte Seyslip (Nicolas).
 Swigny (Edmond).
 O’Farell (Emanuel).
 O’Farell (Jacques).


                          _Sous-Lieutenants._

 Maclosky (Jacques).
 De Morgan (Jean-Baptiste).
 Mac Sheehy (Patrice).
 Fitzgerald (Edouard).
 Shee (Guillaume).
 O’Farell (Emmanuel).
 Fitzmaurice (Joseph).
 O’Reilly (Charles).
 Macdonald (Jean-Baptiste).
 O’Meara (Daniel).
 Khnopff (Louis).
 Mahony (Denis).
 Sheldon (Guillaume).
 O’Moran (Charles).
 Owens (Henry).
 Strange (Patrice).
 Purdon (Henry).
 Murphy (Patrice).
 Dehays (Thomas).


                         RÉGIMENT DE WALSH.[4]

Footnote 4:

  The officers of but one battalion of the regiment of Walsh are given
  here.


                             _État-Major._


                                _Major._

 O’Brien (Thadée).


                      _Quartier-Maitre Tresorier._

 Bancelin (Charles).


                             _Capitaines._

 De Fitz Maurice (Thomas).
 Le chevalier de Walsh (Charles).
 O’Niel (Jean).
 De Nagle (Jacques).
 O’Brien (Jean).
 D’Arcy (Jacques).


                        _Capitaines En Second._

 Stack (Edouard).
 Bellew (Laurent).
 O’Croly (Charles).
 O’Driscol (Jacques).
 Le chevalier O’Connor (Armand).


                             _Lieutenants._

 Plunkett (François).
 O’Riordan (Jacques).
 Keating (Guillaume).
 Barry (Richard).


                        _Lieutenants En Second._

 O’Sheil (Jacques).
 O’Meara (Jean-Baptiste).
 O’Gorman (Charles).
 Meighan (Georges).
 Mac-Carthy (Eugène).


                          _Sous-Lieutenants._

 Keating (Jean).
 Cruice (James).
 O’Crowly (Felix).
 Darell (Philippe).
 O’Flyn (Jacques).
 Barker (William).
 Traut (Thomas).
 Barry (David).
 O’Cahill (Louis).
 Tobin (Jacques).

 M. Macarty de Marteigue, commandant of _Le Magnifque_, 1782.
 Du Fay de Carty, an ensign aboard _Le Magnifque_, 1782.
 Abbe Maccabe, chaplain of _L’Annibal_, 1779–1781.
 Roger Morrison, chaplain of _L’Andromaque_, 1778–’79, and of
    _L’Eveille_, 1780–’82.
 Abbe Bartholome Omahony (O’Mahony), chaplain of _L’Ivelly_.
 Abbe Dowd, “Irlandais,” a chaplain of _Le Jason_.
 Macarty, an ensign aboard _Le Conquerant_, 1780–’82.
 De Rochefermoy (Mathieu), a lieutenant in the regiment de Bourbonnais.




                  CONCERNING “THOMAS THE IRISHMAN.”[5]

     Editorial in the _Irish-American_, New York, October 14, 1905.


Footnote 5:

  On page 121, Vol. V, Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society:
  “Thomas the Irishman” is mentioned as in the Dutch records of New
  York. Thus, Hon. Peter Stuyvesant, Director-General of New Netherland,
  writing to Capt. Martin Cregier, 1663, says: “Your letter by Thomas
  the Irishman has just been received.” ... On August 5, 1663, Captain
  Cregier writes in his journal: “Thomas the Irishman arrived here at
  the Redoubt from the Manhatans.” On September 1, 1663, Captain Cregier
  writes: “Thomas the Irishman and Claesje Hoorn arrived with their
  yachts at the Kill from the Manhatan,” and on the 17th of the same
  month the captain writes: “Thomas the Irishman arrived today.” The
  foregoing references may be found in _Documents Relating to the
  Colonial History of the State of New York_, edited by Fernow, Vol.
  XIII, Albany, 1881.

In the preparation for an exhaustive history of early New York Mr.
Dingman Versteeg, archivist of the Holland Society, has been able to
trace out many heretofore lacking details of the record of the Irishman
who was so prominent here in Governor Stuyvesant’s time.

His name was Thomas Lewis, and he must have gone to Holland from Ireland
some time previous to 1657. How long he remained there does not appear,
but, in that year, he was sent from Amsterdam under contract to the
Dutch West Indies Company as a carpenter to New Amsterdam, as this city
(New York) was then called. His name was transformed in the records to
Thomas Lodewicksen, a sort of Latin-Dutch combination.

For three years after this he does not seem to have made much stir here,
and then he appears as the captain of a bark plying between this city
and Albany. A man of such standing in this community at that time was a
real captain of industry and a citizen of substance.

The favor and regard in which Lewis was held by Governor Stuyvesant is
evidenced by the fact that his bark was used to transport troops in the
Esopus war of 1663, and on it Stuyvesant made his headquarters, so
dating a number of letters still extant.

Lewis was married to a Dutch wife, Geesje Barents, a member of a
prominent and well-known family in this city. He had several children.
One of them, Thomas Lodewicksen, Jr., married Frances, daughter of the
famous Jacob Leisler, head of the colony, which is another indication of
his father’s social prominence.

Lewis died here, on September 14, 1685, and his widow was named
executrix of his will by Governor Dongan, April 1, 1686. There are many
of his descendants among the various Lewis families scattered over this
state, but few of them, perhaps, know that their ancestor was that
“Thomas the Irishman” mentioned so frequently in the old Dutch records
of Stuyvesant’s time.




                     AN INTERESTING PIONEER FAMILY.


James and Isaac Savage and their two sisters, came to America from
Ireland. Afterward, about 1763, their father, James Savage, being then
an aged man, came to this country to Newton, Mass., where the two
daughters had settled. There he died and was buried.

His sons, James and Isaac, settled at Woolwich, Me., where James was
early killed by the Indians. Isaac married and had a large family. His
wife’s name is not known. Among their children was a son, who settled at
Wiscasset, Me., another son who settled at Woolwich and another son,
James, who also settled at Wiscasset. James (3) married Mary Hilton, who
was born at Berwick, Me., in 1721, and lived to be 100 years old. James
and Mary had seventeen children. Order of birth is not known.

They were as follows: Isaac, who married Deborah Soule; Abigail,
married, June 13, 1765, Robert Lambert; Lydia, married, February 1,
1776, Daniel Ring; Hannah, born 1745, married Thomas McFadden; James,
married Annah Young; Ebenezer, born 1753, married Sarah Chase; Abraham,
married, in 1783, Patience Young; John, married, in 1783, Susannah
Tinkham or Pinkham; Jacob, born in 1759, married, in 1781, Hannah Gray;
Mary, married, in 1795, John Card; Charles, married, in 1784, Margaret
Corillard, and married, second, about 1785, Margaret Rose Lovejoy;
Catherine, died April 24, 1800, unmarried; Edward, born 1776, married,
June 6, 1790, Sarah Smith; Andrew, born 1769, married Tamson Tibbetts;
Christiana, Daniel, Ann.




                  EDWARD O’BRIEN’S SCHOOL DICTIONARY.


An interesting historical paragraph recently contributed, states that in
1798 Edward O’Brien printed in New Haven, Conn., his “School Dictionary:
Being a compendium of the latest and most improved dictionaries,” which
exists in two copies—the British Museum copy (perfect) and the Yale
College Library copy (lacking ten pages). This was the first dictionary
by an American author published in this country. It has no date, but is
thought to have been issued towards the end of 1798. Its author, who
taught school in Guilford, Conn., was born there March 10, 1757, and
died there August 20, 1836. Soon after its publication its author and
the Rev. John Elliott (1768–1824, great-great-grandson of John Elliott,
the Indian apostle) prepared the second American dictionary, which was
copyrighted in June, 1799, and published in January, 1800.




                      A PATRIOT OF THE REVOLUTION.


James Stevenson, a native of Ireland, was born in 1750 and was brought
to this country when a child. During the Revolutionary War he served as
a sergeant in Colonel Evans’ Pennsylvania regiment, was captured by the
enemy and held for a year in the notorious British prison ships.

After the war he married Hannah Bull, a daughter of Col. John Bull, of
Chester County, Pa., a soldier of the Revolution. They removed to
Lawrence County, Pa., Mr. Stevenson dying in Poland, Ohio, in 1834. He
left many descendants and a society has been formed among them. It holds
annual reunions.

Among his descendants may be mentioned: John H. Stevenson, of Allegheny;
Prof. William M. Stevenson, of Pittsburg; Rev. Frank B. Stevenson, of
New Castle; Dr. Silas Stevenson; James A. Stevenson and E. S. Stevenson,
of New Castle; T. D. Stevenson, of New Bedford, Pa.; Mrs. Rebecca
Stevenson Neal, of Pulaski, Pa.; Capt. Thomas S. Calhoun, of Georgetown,
Pa.; Thomas S. McCready, of Manchester, Kas.; Homer A. McCready, of
Hancock County, W. Va.; Thomas W. Stevenson, of East Liverpool, O.;
William E. Stevenson, of Hookstown, Pa., and W. H. Stevenson, of
Hookstown.




                   THE HALEYS OF THE ISLES OF SHOALS.


Andrew Haley was of the Isles of Shoals. He was of Irish blood and had a
son, Andrew, who married Elizabeth Scammon, of Kittery, Me., in 1697.
Andrew Haley, Sr., early settled on the islands and eventually became
styled “King of the Shoals.” He and his descendants seem to have long
occupied that portion of the Shoals known as Haley’s Island. In the
_Collections of the Massachusetts Historical Society_, for 1800, is a
paper descriptive of the Shoals, from which paper we extract the
following: “The only secure harbour in these islands is Haley’s, which
opens to the S. W., having Haley’s island S. E., Malaga N. W., a wall
built by Mr. Haley, between 70 and 80 paces in length, on the N. E....
At the close of the year 1800 there were on Haley’s island, three decent
dwelling houses, occupied by Mr. Haley, an ingenious and respectable old
gentleman of seventy-six, and his two sons, with their families. Mr.
Haley has expended a handsome fortune in erecting the expensive wall
before mentioned, wharves, and other useful works. Among these are a
windmill, rope walk, 270 feet long; salt works erected before the war
[Revolution], a bake house, brewery, distillery, built in 1783, and a
blacksmith’s and cooper’s shop.”




                    THE IMPORTATION OF IRISH BUTTER.


Long before the Revolution, and long after that period, Irish pork and
butter were imported to this country in great quantities. A Boston paper
publishes the following letter, which was dated October 29, 1763, and
sent from a leading firm in Boston to parties in Ireland: “This is to
Desire you will as soon as possible & without Fail Ship us from Cork 250
Barrels Best Irish Pork & 100 Firkins of good Irish Butter, the weight
of each Barrell of Pork to be mark’d on the head, to be well Pack’d.
This Article will be very Scarce & Dear here, that we must Depend upon
your shipping it with the 100 Firkins of Butter [all] to be here in
March if possible & if no oppor’y to this place Ship it to Halifax to
the care of Benj. Gerrish Esqr. and as soon as the next May Butter is
fit to ship we Desire you will then ship us 100 Firkins more of the best
Rose May Butter. We rely on your care to have these articles of the best
kind & purchased at the best Rates, which charge to our accott. We beg
your attention to this that we may not by any means be disappointed, as
we shall be in great want of it. We are with Respect, Gent., Your most
hum. Servts, Messrs. Jona. Barnard & Co.”—(From _The Recorder_ [A. I. H.
S.], Boston, Mass., March, 1902.)




                   THE DISTRICT KNOWN AS IRISH TRACT.


A Moravian missionary who went from Pennsylvania to Georgia, in
1743–’44, writes that while in the lower valley of Virginia: “I asked
him (Joist Hite) for the way to Carolina. He told me of one which runs
for 150 miles through Irish settlements, the district being known as
Irish tract.”—(_Virginia Magazine of History and Biography_, October,
1904.)




                 TWO INTERESTING HISTORICAL FRAGMENTS.


Barnabas Palmer, of Rochester, N. H., was born in Cork or Limerick,
1725, emigrated from there with two brothers, and enlisted under Sir
William Pepperill. Barnabas sailed from Portsmouth, N. H.,—one of the
force of 3,000 men, 1745, and on the Isle of Cape Breton, under Fort
Louisburg, left his right arm. Subsequently he settled in Rochester, N.
H., married, had fourteen children, and was a member of the General
Court of New Hampshire that ratified the Constitution of the United
States. Here is another fragment of history: Lieutenant-General
Pepperrell, in 1745, ordered Maj. John Stover to organize a company at
Wells, Me., for the Louisburg expedition. The order was promptly carried
out. Among the volunteers were Edward Welch, John Conaway, James
Gillpatrick, John McDaniel, James Read, Michael Wilson and John Burks
(Burke?). They sailed March 24, 1745, for Cape Breton. Some of the
company died there. In the fall of 1745 most of the survivors returned
to Wells.




                   WORKMEN FIND AN INTERESTING COIN.


Workmen who were digging in Congress Street [Boston] the other day found
an interesting old coin which is said by experts to link the records of
Boston currency nearly two centuries ago with a mintage controversy that
stirred even the phlegmatic George III, and elicited some of the most
famous witticisms of Dean Swift and dignified declarations of Sir Isaac
Newton. It is about one third larger than an American quarter and has on
the obverse side an idealized head of George III, in the center,
surrounded with the words “Georgius Deo Gratia Rex.” Perhaps the
intrinsic interest is in the reverse side, which has in the center a
symbolic figure of Ireland, bearing a harp, and on the border is stamped
“Hibernia—1723.” The first anomaly in this is that, although it was on
its face an Irish coin, it was neither coined nor circulated in that
country, but, owing to indignant protests of Irish dealers, crystallized
by the sarcasms of that witty divine, Dean Swift, it was shipped over to
Boston, where it circulated as the “colonial half-penny.” In the old
country it was called the “Woods half-penny,” on account of its coinage
by a Londoner of that name. This was the chief element of grievance, as
Ireland was then approaching the time when the aspiration of a Grattan
were to find realization, and Swift argued in his famous Drapier letters
that the country should not have these foreign and false coins passed
upon it.—(_Boston Transcript_, October 12, 1895.)




                    DENNIS MACCARTY OF WARREN, R. I.

                   BY MISS VIRGINIA BAKER, OF WARREN.


Since I forwarded the data relating to Dennis and William Mackarty, I
have again examined the probate records of this town, and have made the
discovery that the will of Dennis Maccarty of Warren was probated
November 7, 1757. As Dennis of Bristol did not die until 1760, it
follows that there must have been living in Bristol County two men
bearing the same name, both of whom served in the French wars.

I enclose a copy of the will of Dennis of Warren. In 1757, Warren, as
you know, included Barrington. You will notice that the legatees
mentioned in the will were all Barrington men; therefore, I conclude
that that Dennis resided in the west section of the town. Again, the
testator mentions no kindred, while Dennis of Bristol had a wife and
son. Here is the will mentioned:

“In the Name of God Amen I Dennis Maccarty of Warren in the County of
Bristol in the Colony of Rhode Island Labourer being engaged in the
expedition against Crown Point; and not knowing what Shall befall me
Being now of a Sound and Disposing mind; Thanks be to God; Do make this
my last will and Testament in manner following; Principally and first of
all I give my soul to the hands of God that gave it and my Body to the
earth to be Decently Buried in a Christian manner hoping for a Blessed
Resurrection thro the merits of Jesus our only Redeemer; and as to my
worldly goods where with it hath Pleased God to Bless me I give the same
in the following manner;

“Item. My Will is that my Just Debts and Funeral Charges be Duly and
Seasonably Paid by my executor.

“Item. To my loving and well beloved Friend Peleg Richmond I give a Note
of hand I have against him of one hundred and thirty-two pounds old
tenor Rhode Island currency.

“Item. To my loving and beloved friend John Roger Richmond I give all my
wearing apparel.

“Item. To my friend Mary Richmond Juner I give one hundred pounds. To
her sister Elizabeth Richmond I give sixty pounds; and to Sarah Richmond
I give forty pounds; all to be paid in old tenor Rhode Island.

“Item. To my beloved friend Benjamin Viall I give a note of hand I have
against him of Forty Pounds three Shillings old tenor.

“Item. To my beloved friend Thomas Brown I give Thirty Pounds old tenor
Rhode Island currency.

“To my Trusty and Beloved Friend Solomon Townsend of Warren, Clerk, whom
I make executor of my last will and Testament I give and bequeath all
the Remainder of my moneys, Bills, notes, Bonds, and wares that Shall
Remain and become Due After the above Legacies are Paid. And I Do Ratify
and confirm this to be my last will and testament. In Witness hereof I
have Set my hand and Seal this Thirtieth Day of April in the Twenty
ninth year of his majesties’ Reign Anno Domini Seventeen Hundred and
Fifty Six.

                                                             “his
                                                     “Dennis X Maccarty,
                                                           “mark.

“Signed, Sealed, Published and delivered by sd. Dennis Maccarty to be
his last Will and Testament.

  “In presence of
  “Constant Viall.
  “David Allen, Jr.
  “Samuel Viall.”
  Probated November 7, 1757.”




                      THE VOYAGE OF THE SEAFLOWER.

           From _The Recorder_ (I. A. H. S.), February, 1902.


The sloop _Seaflower_ left Belfast, Ireland, July 10, 1741, bound for
Philadelphia, in the province of Pennsylvania. She had 106 persons
aboard, mainly emigrants.

The _Seaflower_ was owned by Joseph Thompson of New Haven, Conn., and
Capt. Ebenezer Clark, master of the sloop. Thompson owned three fourths
and Clark the remainder. When about two weeks out, Captain Clark, the
master, sickened and died and the mate was also taken ill.

Thus began a reign of suffering, wretchedness and misery that has seldom
been surpassed in the annals of ocean voyages. Some time after the
master’s death the sloop sprung her mast and to add to the horrors of
the voyage the supply of water and provisions began to run low.

The accident to the mast, the sickness and other troubles greatly
extended the voyage so that long before the American coast was sighted
many of the ship’s company and passengers had perished of hunger.

In order to sustain life the living were driven to feed on the dead. Six
bodies had been thus consumed and the seventh was being cut up when the
_Success_, man-of-war, came alongside and her captain supplied the
well-nigh crazed survivors of the _Seaflower_ with provisions sufficient
to bring them into port.

Now to account for this fearful voyage: It is possible that the sloop
was overcrowded on leaving Belfast; also that a miscalculation had been
made as to the probable length of time that would be required for the
voyage, this leading to an inadequate supply of water and provisions.
The death of the master and the illness of the mate likewise had a
decided tendency to complicate matters. When the food supply was at
length exhausted, and the last drop of water gone, thirst was added to
the horrors of hunger. With the vessel still many leagues from land, the
awful sufferings of passengers and crew can be imagined, not described.

Forty-six died on the passage.

The _Seaflower_ cast anchor in Boston Harbor, October 31, sixteen weeks
having elapsed since she sailed from Ireland. On the date mentioned,
October 31, 1741, the selectmen of Boston convened in session, there
being present: Captain Forsyth, Caleb Lyman, Jonas Clark, Mr. Hancock,
Mr. Cook and Captain Steel. At this meeting was considered “The sloop
_Seaflower_ this day arrived from Belfast, Ebenezer Clark, late master,
with 65 passengrs on board....” The following minute was recorded, viz.,
that

“Whereas a Sloop from Ireland with a number of Passengers on board being
arrived in this Harbour & apprehending danger may acrue to the
Inhabitants by reason of the Hardships the People have Suffered in their
Passage being obliged to eat some of their People to Sustain Life, Voted
That the Select Men View the State of the Persons on board with Doct^r
Clark & Report what Circumstances they are in....”

The selectmen accordingly visited the afflicted survivors of the
_Seaflower_ and found the facts as here outlined. So serious was the
case, that the Selectmen again met on November 2 and decided to wait on
the governor and council to acquaint them with the conditions and see
what could be done. The same day, November 2, a meeting of the governor
and council was held in the council chamber in Boston, the selectmen
appeared, stated their case and sought advice.

They declared that about thirty of the passengers were in “very low
circumstances & not able of taking care of themselves, but require the
speediest care to preserve life.” The selectmen prayed “that suitable
provision may be made for them or else they must perish.” The governor
and council accordingly

Ordered that the selectmen secure the papers belonging to the owners and
last master, with the goods aboard and dispose of the servants and
passengers in hospital on Rainsford’s island, where they were to be
supported and nursed. It was also ordered that the “owners of the said
Sloop” be speedily advised of existing conditions and requested to come
to Boston, “pay the Charges herein expended & take all further Care in
the Premisses as shall be necessary.”

The selectmen thereupon sent an express to Joseph Thompson, of New
Haven, asking him to repair to Boston and take charge of the _Seaflower_
and servants. They likewise directed the town clerk of Boston to write
to Mr. Thompson. The selectmen also voted that Captain Forsyth and
Captain Steel of their number be a committee to go aboard the sloop and
take an account of the papers, etc., and secure them, Mr. Savell to see
that the unfortunate people were supplied with all things necessary to
their comfort until the vessel was taken to Rainsford’s island. Mr. Ball
was directed to take the sloop there as soon as possible.

On Tuesday morning, the vessel and passengers were taken over to the
island “with the help of Capt. Tyng & his People who came in the long
boat & other persons.” The passengers were all carried ashore and lodged
in the hospital. Doctor Clark gave directions for the treatment of the
patients, and men were put in charge of the vessel and the goods aboard.

The selectmen met again on November 16. Mr. Thompson of New Haven
appeared and stated that he owned three fourths of the sloop and that
Ebenezer Clark, the deceased master, owned the rest. He asked that the
vessel’s papers he delivered to him and this was done. Thompson and
Captain Steel, the latter one of the selectmen, assumed all the charges
incurred.

The facts briefly stated herein have been obtained from the minutes of
the selectmen of Boston as reproduced in printed form by the record
commissioners of that city.




                     THE STORY OF MISS FITZGERALD.

   From _The Recorder_ (A. I. H. S.), Boston, Mass., December, 1901.


Portsmouth, R. I., was settled in 1638. Nine years later it was the most
populous town in the colony. Here Eleazar Slocum was born on the “25th
day of the 10th month 1664.” He resided there until some twenty years of
age when he removed to Dartmouth Township, now included in the city of
New Bedford, Mass.

In Dartmouth he wedded an Irish girl named Elephell Fitzgerald.
Concerning her there are two theories. The first is that she was the
daughter of an Irish earl and came to this country with her sister, who
was eloping with an English officer. The second theory is that favored
by Charles E. Slocum, M. D. Ph. D. In his _History of the Slocums_ he
inclines to the belief that Miss Fitzgerald was one of those Irish
maidens who were shipped to New England in Cromwell’s time or at later
periods.

There were doubtless large numbers of these Irish girls brought over.
The majority of them were, without question, Roman Catholics. Frequently
their fate was a hard and cruel one. Thebaud, in his _Irish Race in the
Past and the Present_, writing on the subject says:

“Such of them as were sent North were to be distributed among the
‘saints’ of New England, to be esteemed by the said ‘saints’ as
‘idolaters,’ ‘vipers,’ ‘young reprobates,’ just objects of ‘the wrath of
God’; or, if appearing to fall in with their new and hard task-masters,
to be greeted with words of dubious praise as ‘brands snatched from the
burning,’ ‘vessels of reprobation,’ destined, perhaps, by a due
initiation of the ‘saints’ to become ‘vessels of election,’ in the
meantime to be unmercifully scourged with the ‘besom of righteousness,’
at the slightest fault or mistake.”

Some, however, met a better fate. Their lines fell in more fortunate
places. In many cases they were kindly treated and, in time, married
into the families of their recent masters. Some of them, too, reared
large families of manly sons and womanly daughters and lived to a happy
old age. Many of their descendants must exist today in high places.
Perhaps some are not aware of their maternal Irish descent, while a few
may be reluctant to acknowledge it if they are. Yet, many of these Irish
girls were descended from the old nobility and clansmen whose names and
fames had ranked with the most illustrious in Europe.

Miss Fitzgerald’s marriage to Eleazar Slocum took place about 1687.
Their children were Meribah, born in 1689; Mary, born 1691; Eleazar,
born in 1693–’94; John, 1696–’97; Benjamin, 1699, and Joanna, 1702.
There was also another child named Ebenezer. In 1699 the husband and
father is recorded as giving £3 toward building a Quaker meeting house.
His will was proved in 1727. It makes the following provisions
concerning his wife:

“Item—I give and bequeath Elephell, my beloved wife, the sum of twenty
pounds [per] annum of Good and Lawful money of New England, to be paid
Yearly and Every Year By my Execut^{rs} During her Naturall life—

“Item—I give and bequeath to Elephell my beloved wife an Indian girl
named Dorcas During the time she hath to Serve by Indenture—she
fulfilling all articles on my behalf—

“Item—I give and Bequeath to Elephell my beloved wife, The great low
room of my Dwelling house with the two bedrooms belonging together with
the Chamber over it and the Bedrooms belonging thereto, and the Garrett
and also what part of the N^w Addition she shall Choose and one half of
the cellar, During her Naturall life.

“Item—I will that my executors procure and supply Elephell my wife with
firewood sufficient During her Naturall life, And whatsoever Provisions
and Corn shall be left after my Decease, I give to Elephell my wife for
her support, and also the hay for Support of the Cattle. The above gifts
and Bequests is all and what I intend for Elephell my wife instead of
her thirds or Dowry.”

To his son Eleazar he bequeathed the northerly part of the homestead
farm, 100 acres, with house, barns, orchard, etc.; to son Ebenezer, the
southerly part of the homestead farm “on which my dwelling house
stands.” To Eleazar and Ebenezer he also gives other lands, and to
Ebenezer, in addition one pair of oxen, a pair of steers, eight cows,
two heifers and £12. The remainder of the horses, cattle, etc., he gives
to Eleazar and Ebenezer. The inventory shows £5,790 18s 11d personal
estate.

His widow, Elephell (Fitzgerald) Slocum, made a will “the 19th day of
the first month called March 1745–6.” It was proved October 4, 1748.
Joanna, one of her daughters, married Daniel, son of John Weeden of
Jamestown, R. I. A son of theirs was named Gideon Slocum Weeden.

The late Esther B. Carpenter of Wakefield, R. I., author of a delightful
volume of sketches entitled _South County Neighbors_, once alluded to
Miss Fitzgerald in a note to the writer. Miss Carpenter said that she
remembered to have heard her maternal grandmother say that she valued
her Irish line of descent from Miss Fitzgerald above any other she could
claim. This Irish connection had always been a common remark in the
family. The grandmother in question had named one of her daughters Alice
Joanna after her Irish ancestress, whose daughter Joanna had married a
Weeden as already stated. Many of the Weeden, Slocum and other families
now in Rhode Island trace descent back to Elephell, the gentle Irish
girl. Descendants of Elephell (Fitzgerald) Slocum are found today in New
Bedford, Mass. The writer recently conversed with one of them.




            THE DEFENCE OF FORT STEPHENSON ON THE SANDUSKY.

            By J. W. Faulkner, in the Cincinnati _Enquirer_.


“We have determined to hold this place, and, by heavens, we can.” This
was the closing sentence of a military despatch written on the night of
July 29, 1813. It was penned in the commandant’s room of the rude
stockade known as Fort Stephenson, on the Sandusky River.

The writer was Maj. George Croghan, of the Seventeenth United States
Infantry, a boy who had just attained his twenty-first year. It was
addressed to Gen. William Henry Harrison, in command of the American
forces in the Northwest. The reply of General Harrison to this
remarkable despatch was an order removing Major Croghan from command and
ordering him to report to headquarters under virtual arrest for
disobedience.

Young Croghan responded promptly, traversing a dangerous country. Face
to face with his general he explained that it was not braggadocio that
inspired the language of his message. When it was written it was
expected that it would fall into the hands of the enemy, then boastfully
advancing to the attack. With the warlike eloquence that came as
heritage from his Irish ancestors, Major Croghan showed his general that
it was too late to retreat from the fort, and that it was a necessary
military maneuver to hold it pending the execution of other movements.
His tongue won for him what every great soul desires—opportunity.
Restored to command, he returned to the fort and won a victory that will
forever live in the annals of the early republic.

Not long ago the body of Major Croghan was interred at the base of the
monument erected to the memory of the soldiers of Sandusky County. This
imposing shaft marks the site of the old fort where the dead hero won
his laurels and where the blow was struck that opened the way to
ultimate victory over the British and Indian power in the northwestern
country. Over his grave will stand as a silent witness the single cannon
used in defense of the fort, an ancient six-pounder, which wears the
affectionate feminine sobriquet of “Old Betsy.” It was a single belch
from the iron jaws of this that decided the fate of the battle, and
though inanimate, still it deserved a share of the glory that surrounded
the interment of the gallant Croghan.

Since that eventful day in August many great events have occurred to
fill the pages of history. General Harrison became greater and filled
the president’s chair. Around the base of the old fort a city has sprung
up named after Gen. John C. Fremont, the Pathfinder. In Croghan’s day
the little settlement was known as Lower Sandusky, to distinguish it
from the city in Wyandot County known as Upper Sandusky. So powerful a
pleader as Rutherford B. Hayes, then a practising attorney at the
Sandusky County bar, and afterward president of the United States,
pleaded that the old name be permitted to stand.

There was pomp and ceremony to mark the final sepulture of the old
commander’s dust in the ground that he hallowed with his victory, but no
greater tribute could be paid to his soldier memory than to tell again
the story of the battle. He came of fighting stock, this young American
soldier. The blood of “Kelly, Burke and Shea” flowed in his veins and he
smelled the battle from afar off. His father was William Croghan, an
Irishman, born in Dublin in 1752, but who was well settled in this
country when the War of the Revolution broke out. He fought at Monmouth,
Brandywine and Germantown, and froze with the rest of the immortal band
at Valley Forge.

Joining in the drift from the Virginias across the mountains, he reached
the settlement at the falls of the Ohio, where Louisville now stands. In
1791 he married Lucy Clark, sister of George Rogers Clark, the mighty
figure of the Vincennes campaign, who saved an empire to the American
republic. Another brother, William, was the Clark who, with Captain
Lewis, made the historic exploration tour across the then unknown
continent. Of such a union was born the man whom a state and a nation
afterward honored for bravery. The exact place of his birth was at
Locust Grove, Ky., a few miles below Louisville. When but twenty years
of age he gained distinction at the battle of Tippecanoe, and was
promoted to a captaincy in March, 1812, being detailed as aide-de-camp
to General Harrison, with the rank of major. This was his condition when
the events that were to make him famous began to unfold themselves.

The Indians, under Tecumseh, and the British, under General Proctor, had
raised the siege of Fort Meigs, in what is now Wood County, and were
coming toward the post at Upper Sandusky and Seneca. The British sailed
around into Sandusky Bay, while their Indian allies marched across
through the swamps and marshes of the Portage River. They expected to
meet and make a combined attack upon Lower Sandusky while Harrison was
engaged in protecting Forts Winchester and Meigs. The work known as Fort
Stephenson was in reality an old stockade used for storage purposes, and
inclosed an acre of ground.

Examination by Harrison some days before the allies invested Fort Meigs
showed that the stockade was commanded by a hill to the southeast. It
was not strong enough to resist heavy artillery, and only 200 men could
be accommodated as a garrison. Croghan was left in charge, with orders
that if the British approached by water, which carried the presumption
that if they had their heavy artillery, he was to retreat, if possible,
destroying both the fort and the public stores. If only the Indians came
he was to stand fast, as retreat through these wary hostiles was an
impossibility and a defense was a certainty.

On July 29 Harrison received word that the siege of Fort Meigs had been
raised and that it seemed the intention of the allies to descend upon
either Sandusky or Seneca. At a council of war held that night it was
decided that Fort Stephenson was untenable and orders were sent to Major
Croghan to carry out his original instructions. This order did not reach
Croghan until the next morning at eleven o’clock. A council of his
officers reached the decision that it was too late to retreat and the
famous note was sent and the meeting with Harrison arranged. On August 1
the advance guard of the enemy was seen on the hill over the river. They
were the fleet-footed Indians who had been observed by a reconnoitering
party from headquarters the day before. There was but one piece of
artillery in the fort, “Old Betsey,” and it was promptly fired, causing
the redskins to retire. Within a half hour the British gunboats, a part
of Commodore Barclay’s fleet, hove into sight. A landing was effected a
half mile below the fort and a howitzer disembarked and mounted.

A British officer, Major Chambers, with a flag of truce, was sent
forward and was met by Ensign Shipp, of the Seventeenth Regiment. The
visitor demanded in the name of General Proctor the immediate surrender
of the fort. The Americans were warned that it would be almost
impossible to restrain the Indians in case of success, and that the
whole garrison would be slain. The gallant answer was returned that the
Indians would find no one to massacre when the fort fell, for every man
had sworn to die before surrender.

The battle then opened, the gunboats, the land battery, five hundred
Wellington veterans and eight hundred Indians joining in the attack.
Throughout the evening Croghan fired his six pounder in a desultory way,
moving it from place to place to make it appear that he had more
artillery. Ascertaining from the enemy’s fire that the northwestern
angle of the fort was to be reached, he made preparation to checkmate
his plans. During the night the gun was removed to a block house which
commanded that angle and the embrasure was masked. The piece itself was
loaded with grape and slugs. Croghan’s foresight was vindicated when the
next day additional artillery was landed and the hammering of the doomed
angle was renewed. The shaking wall was reinforced with bags of sand and
even of flour, making it capable of resisting the pounding. On the
evening of August 2 the grand assault was launched, Colonel Short
leading the principal column.

He rallied his men with great bravery under a destructive rifle fire and
gained the ditch beneath the stockade walls. There he ordered his men to
cut down the pickets and give the Americans no quarter. At the proper
second of time the masked embrasure was thrown open and the slug-charged
cannon was permitted to belch its death-dealing contents into the close
packed mass of soldiers at short range. Few escaped this destructive
fire. Colonel Short was killed.

The second column, led by Major Chambers and Colonel Warburton, was also
defeated by the line in charge of Captain Hunter. When night came the
enemy withdrew in a disorderly fashion, leaving behind them one of their
gunboats, some of the wounded, much ammunition and many guns. At nine
o’clock the next morning, Major Croghan sent an express to Harrison
announcing his victory and the retirement of the defeated enemy. The
defenders of the fort lost only one killed and seven wounded of the 100
men who answered roll call. Ten times that number opposed them, and
2,000 more were in reserve near Fort Meigs to cut off any reinforcement
from that direction.

In his official report of the battle Harrison said: “It will not be
among the least of Proctor’s mortifications that he has been baffled by
a youth who has just passed his twenty-first year. He is, however, a
hero worthy of his gallant uncle, Gen. George Rogers Clark.” The brevet
rank of lieutenant-colonel was at once conferred upon the young hero by
the president of the United States, and he was presented with a sword by
the ladies of Chillicothe. Of this victory, Gen. W. T. Sherman, writing
from the standpoint of a military expert, said: “The defense of Fort
Stephenson by Croghan and his gallant little band was the necessary
precursor to Perry’s victory on the lake and of Harrison’s triumphant
victory on the Thames. These assured our immediate ancestors the mastery
of the great West, and from that day to this the West has been the
bulwark of the nation.”

The following year saw him made a full lieutenant-colonel. He served
with distinction until 1817, when he resigned and went to New Orleans to
live. He was made postmaster of that city in 1824. Some years later he
was appointed inspector general of the army, and in 1835 he was voted a
gold medal by Congress in recognition of his fight of twenty-two years
before.

He died on January 8, 1849, while the guns were thundering their salutes
in honor of another great victory, that of General Jackson, another
Irishman’s son, over Packenham and the British below New Orleans in
1814. His body was removed to the old family burying ground at Locust
Grove and buried near that of his famous uncle, where they were found
last June by Maj. Webb C. Hayes, acting for the Fremont Chapter of the
Daughters of the American Revolution, which is named after Major
Croghan.

They were removed to Fremont on June 10, and were placed temporarily in
the vault at Oakwood Cemetery. The pall-bearers were five venerable
survivors of the Mexican War who had enlisted in Sandusky County. The
youngest was seventy-seven years of age and the oldest eighty-five. As
Croghan was inspector-general of the army during the Mexican War, they
can be said to have served under him. The dead hero left three children.
His only son, St. George Croghan, died on the field early in the Civil
War, wearing the gray of the Confederate army. A grandson, also George
Croghan, survives, and there are other descendants on the distaff side.

The Daughters of the American Revolution have erected on the British
redoubt 250 yards northwest of Fort Stephenson a tablet commemorating
the fact that it was there that the cannon from Commodore Barclay’s
fleet thundered against Croghan’s walls. Exultingly the fact is
proclaimed that Barclay was afterward wounded and his entire fleet,
including the cannon which had been used against Fort Stephenson, was
captured by Commodore Perry at the battle of Lake Erie in the following
September.




                     IRISH SETTLERS ON THE OPEQUAN.

    Compiled from an Article by “Iveagh,” in the _Belfast_ (Ireland)
                               _Witness_.


The year 1718 marks an epoch in the history of America, because in that
year a band of sturdy Ulster men turned their faces and fortunes towards
the new world. This early and most important organized company of
emigrants to leave Ireland in the eighteenth century sailed from Lough
Foyle in the year above named, and consisted of about 100 families.
(Marmion’s _Maritime Ports of Ireland_.) These people founded a colony
in New Hampshire which became famous in the history of America. The
emigrants were of as much importance to America as were those of
Plymouth, and from them are descended equally if not more distinguished
men.

In 1727, 3,000 people sailed for the North American colonies from
Belfast Lough. The following year, ships took 1,000 more, and in the
next three years as many as 4,200. The tidings of the success of the New
Hampshire colonists and of those who preceded them to other parts of
America, drew between the years 1720 and 1742 over 3,000 emigrants
annually from Ulster alone. (Gordon’s _History of Ireland_.) This
enormous emigration, for the period, was stimulated by the rich
resources and grand opportunities offered in a new country on the one
hand, and on the other by the land laws and the restrictions placed on
Irish industries.

In 1736 a number of families emigrated from Banbridge, County Down, and
neighborhood; amongst them were members of the Glass, MacDowell, Magill,
Mulholland, Linn and other families. These people settled in the
Shenandoah Valley on the banks of the Opequan, Virginia.

In the beautiful valley of Shenandoah, three miles south of Winchester,
Va., you will find the ruins of the old Opequan Presbyterian Church,
destroyed in the Civil War. From the Donegal (Pennsylvania) Presbytery,
as early as 1736, the Presbyterian settlers received attention, as they
were visited by missionaries and ministers from that Presbytery, making
it the earliest preaching place in the valley. The first pastor was John
Hodge, who may justly be esteemed the founder of the church, as he gave
five acres of land for the church site and graveyard. Mr. Hodge, with
many of his large family, are buried there, as well as Samuel Glass, the
emigrant from Banbridge.

Samuel Glass, the leader of the Banbridge emigrants, took up his
residence at the head spring of the Opequan, after many wanderings
through the then almost pathless woods, naming the homestead Greenwood,
from the grand old forest which covered for the most part the 16,000
acres of land which he had purchased. His son David settled lower down
the river, at a place named Cherry Mead, and Robert, another son, took
up his abode at Long Meadows. James Vance, a son-in-law of Samuel Glass,
resided in the same neighborhood. Another son-in-law named Becket, lived
between the Glass estate and North Mountain.—(Foot’s _Sketches of
Virginia_, second edition.) Samuel Glass died at an advanced age,
honored and respected by all the settlers over a large portion of the
state; he had centered in his person many good characteristics—courage,
thrift, perseverance. In the cemetery, near the old homestead, stands a
monument to Samuel Glass and his wife, erected by his descendants. It is
an obelisk, executed in limestone, standing on a pedestal, in all over
ten feet in height. On the south side is inscribed:

                       +------------------------+
                       |     To the Memory      |
                       |         of             |
                       |     SAMUEL GLASS       |
                       |     and his wife,      |
                       |     MARY GAMBLE,       |
                       |       emigrants        |
                       |    from Banbridge,     |
                       |      County Down,      |
                       |        Ireland,        |
                       |       A. D. 1736.      |
                       +------------------------+

Samuel Glass had six children: John, Eliza, Sarah, David, Robert and
Joseph—all born at Banbridge. Joseph Glass, the son of Samuel Glass, had
twelve children: Mary, Samuel, Robert, Georgetta, Sarah, Elizabeth,
Joseph, Martha, Ruth, David, Nancy, and Sophia. Joseph Glass, son of
Joseph, son of Samuel, the emigrant, entered the ministry of the
Presbyterian Church. He was much esteemed, and widely known as an
eloquent preacher. Other members of the family also distinguished
themselves.

William Linn, son of one of these settlers, was born at Banbridge and
served under Lord Dunmore, Governor of Virginia, in the wars with the
Indians. In the several encounters which took place he distinguished
himself, and was rewarded with a commission as lieutenant. Soon after
the breaking out of hostilities with the mother country, Linn joined the
First Virginia Regiment with the rank of lieutenant.

An expedition was organized with the object of securing ammunition from
the Spanish authorities at New Orleans. Capt. George Gibson, an
Ulsterman, was entrusted with the leadership of the party, and attended
by Lieutenant Linn, with a detachment of their company, descended the
river Ohio from Fort Pitt on the 19th of May, 1776, reaching New Orleans
on the 22d of September, after a succession of adventures that, in
narrative, more resemble romance than the features of sober truth. The
shores of the Ohio were lined with hostile Indians, and no white man
before had attempted the voyage. Captain Gibson having accomplished his
mission, and being secretly released from prison, in which he had been
confined to remove the suspicion of the British residents, placed
Lieutenant Linn in command.

Captain Gibson took ship from New Orleans, taking with him the powder
for service on the seaboard, and in due course landed at Philadelphia,
and from thence proceeded to Virginia. Linn’s party, with a total
strength of forty-three men, arrived at Wheeling in the spring of 1777,
with the barges containing the supply of powder for the western posts.
The party suffered many hardships and ran considerable risk from the
Indians. For this important and arduous service Gibson was raised to the
rank of major and Linn to that of captain. In 1780 we find Linn a
colonel commanding a battalion at the battle of Pigua or Chillicothe, in
which action he distinguished himself with bravery, his battalion having
borne the brunt of the battle, losing many of its men. Colonel Linn
continued to serve the revolted colonies after they had achieved their
independence. He was ordered to the West to assist in the campaign
against the Northwest Indians, and was killed in attempting to reach a
secret rendezvous at a place called No-Linn-Hill, in Kentucky—a name
acquired from the first exclamation of surprise by a party of his men
not finding him at the spot.




                 IRISH PIONEERS IN BOSTON AND VICINITY.

               BY HON. JOHN C. LINEHAN,[6] CONCORD, N. H.


Footnote 6:

  Died in September, 1905. He was a founder of the Society and its first
  treasurer-general. This paper was the opening one of a series
  contributed by him to the Boston _Pilot_, in 1890, and bearing the
  general title of “How the Irish Came as Builders of the Nation.”

“The Massachusetts Bay” was, of all the original thirteen colonies, the
most hostile towards the Irish, and it made but little difference with
the Puritans whether the former were Catholic or Presbyterian, all fared
alike, and were looked upon as people neither to be encouraged nor
tolerated.

However, they continued to come in, despite this dislike, in one
capacity or another, and one—Captain Patrick—appears in the records of
1632. Florence McCarthy was a resident of Boston in 1686. He was a
butcher by occupation, and one of the founders of the first Episcopal
Church in the town.

Esther MacCarty’s name is signed to an indenture, as a witness, about
the same period. According to Palfrey, New England, up to the beginning
of the great Irish emigration, was more unmixed in blood than any county
in England. While this may seem true of Massachusetts, it will hardly
apply to New Hampshire, and will not stand investigation in the Bay
State, for according to the same authority, 400 or 500 Scotch were
transported by Cromwell to Massachusetts in 1651, and thirty-four years
later 150 families of French Huguenots came, followed in 1719, by 120
families of Irish, mainly from the North of Ireland. To these mentioned
by Palfrey must be added, on the authority of Drake, 200 families of the
unfortunate Acadians sent to Massachusetts about 1750.

No mention is made at all of the thousands sold into a kind of slavery
by Cromwell to New England and the West India Islands, from Ireland, and
yet, between 1651 and 1655, on the authority of Prendergast, over 6,000
boys and girls, mainly from the South of Ireland, were shipped to those
two points.

The addition of 400 or 500 Scotch, 150 families of French Huguenots and
the unknown number of Irish arriving in Massachusetts in less than
twenty-five years from the establishment of the colony of Massachusetts
Bay, will justify a contradiction of this statement of Palfrey’s. The
Acadians and the Irish are prolific, and in this respect could keep pace
with their English neighbors, and a comparison of the well-known New
England families of the past hundred years, with an equal number of
families in any English county, will prove it, for names, as a rule, are
the surest guides to nationalities, and scattered over New England, from
the dates named, are families bearing well-known French and Gaelic
names, many of them slightly changed, but enough left of the original to
trace the transformation. When the War of the Revolution broke out, this
mixture of English, Irish, Scotch and French blood was pretty well
compounded, and it was not surprising that the men of the new American
race humbled Britain, and brought her to her knees.

Adams and Hancock, Sullivan and Knox, Stark and McClary, Revere and
Bowdoin were, in New England, representatives of the nations mentioned,
while the names of Washington and Jefferson, Moylan and Carroll, Mercer
and Paul Jones, Laurens and Marion, showed that the same process was at
work throughout the colonies.

Many Americans, no matter whence they sprung, now mount the
“Anglo-Saxon” hobby, which, like a circus steed, has been so well padded
by writers of history that there is little danger of a dismount, and in
order to be in harmony with the aristocratic trend of the age, a double
hitch is provided by trotting out the “Scotch-Irish” nag as a running
mate, a trifle bony, perhaps, and a little ungainly at first, but time,
good feeding and careful grooming, will make a perfect match, for both
are of the same stock-humbug—a princely origin, for in this age humbug
is king, and its capital, unlimited, is wind.

While Irish blankets and Kilkenny rugs were mercantile commodities in
New Hampshire before King William of “glorious and immortal memory” had
trigged the wheels, Irish butter was a most desirable article in Boston,
as we find that John Hancock, among other goods advertised in his
Faneuil Hall store, speaks of “Newcastle coal and Irish butter cheap for
cash.” Cork from time immemorial being the great butter mart, it would
not be at all surprising if some of the light-footed and light-hearted
sons of that lively city came over with butter. McCarthy is one of the
great Cork names, and in addition to Florence and Esther, named between
1680 and 1760, Elizabeth, Thade, William and Calvin Maccarty are met
quite frequently in the records of the town of Boston, all persons of
means and holding responsible positions.

Florence was town constable in 1693, and Thade Maccarty was elected to a
similar position in 1673. For damage to her house, blown up to check a
fire, Mrs. Elizabeth Maccarty was awarded the sum of $300 and Maccarty’s
corner, on King Street, was a locality frequently mentioned. Florence
was a man of consequence, and one of the leading men in his business.
Leave was given him, in 1693, to build a slaughter house, and from the
frequent mention made of him he must have been the John P. Squire of his
day at the Hub. William Bryant was a servant of Capt. William Hudson in
1679, doubtless one of Cromwell’s transports, many of whom were, by that
date, scattered over New England, especially in what is now Maine and
New Hampshire. Larry is quite common along the border, between the Pine
Tree and Granite states, and the first met in history bear the
distinctive given names of Cornelius, Dennis and Teige. O’Leary is a
South of Ireland name, and the presence of persons bearing it so early
in the colonies, substantiates what is stated by Prendergast in the
_Cromwellian Settlement_.

Eugene Linch (Lynch) came to Boston from Virginia in 1712. The name of
Lynchburgh in the “Old Dominion” denoted the presence of this good old
Galway name. Eugene found a wife in Beverly; and although bearing an
aristocratic Norman name, he was not good enough to reside in Boston,
being ordered to go to Beverly and stay with his wife. James Bettrell,
“an Irish shoemaker,” had better luck, however, being allowed to remain,
on giving bonds. James Barry was a noted huntsman in 1702, and was
complained of for allowing his dogs to run loose. The town constable
ordered him to shut them up.

There is quite frequent mention of ships loaded with passengers from
Ireland, bound for Pennsylvania or Virginia, putting into Boston, from
stress of weather, want of provisions, or sickness among the people on
board. Care was taken by the town authorities to prevent the landing of
any of the passengers, and the records are full of such instances,
between 1700 and 1800, and the town constables were at their wits’ ends
to keep the unwelcome visitors out, for those who landed in other parts
of the country came by land to Boston, attracted, no doubt, by the
rising trade and manufactures of the future metropolis of New England.
Of this class, undoubtedly, was Charles Conner, his wife and child, who
came from Philadelphia in 1732, only to be ordered out of town at once—a
fate many of his nationality had to suffer during this epoch.

Drake, in his _Landmarks of Boston_, says: “About 1718 a number of
colonists arrived from Londonderry, bringing with them the manufacture
of linen and the implements used in Ireland. These emigrants also
introduced the general use of their favorite vegetable, the potato.”

They were not met with a warm welcome, however. So many were coming from
Ireland, in 1718, that Dea. John Marian was ordered to appear before the
courts and take such steps as he might deem proper to keep them away
from the town of Boston, and in this respect the authorities were
impartial. No distinction was made between the natives of Cork or
Belfast, Londonderry or Limerick, the followers of the old faith or the
new; all were treated alike; it was enough to know that they were Irish.
But despite all the obstacles thrown in their way, they kept coming, and
so fast that finally the town council resolved that some steps must be
taken to register them, so in case any of them became a town charge,
their nationality might be known.

To that end all persons receiving or entertaining any of the Irish
people were ordered to notify the authorities, on penalty of being fined
twenty shillings for the first forty-eight hours and ten shillings for
every twenty-four hours afterwards. Repeated warnings were given, but
were as often disregarded. January, 1719, John Maccanis, wife and four
children, were ordered to leave (John McGuinnis would be nearer the
mark). Two shiploads, under command of Capt. Robert Holmes and a Captain
Dennis, were refused permission to land, the same year. In September,
1744, three Irish boys and sixteen Irish girls were captured by a French
privateer and forwarded from Capt. Breton to Boston. Among them were
James Connor, Thomas Bryan, Charles White, Mary Roberts, Mary Price,
Sarah Agin, Mary Benson, Margaret Anderson, Sarah Hathay, Elizabeth
Campbell, Mary Hammell, Eliza Fitzgerald, Sarah McMahon, Bridget
McNamara, Eliza Dunster, Fanny Brady, Jenny Richardson, Kathleen Morris,
Mary Derham. No doubt these poor waifs were looked after by the
Charitable Irish Society, which was then instituted about seven years.
The feeling against their nationality was gradually wearing away, and
the settlements of their countrymen in New Hampshire were already
furnishing the best fighting men against the French and Indians.

As early as 1758, the Macs, with many other well-known Irish names, were
taking a prominent place in the town records. McCarthy, McCarroll,
McClane, MacCluer, McConnell, McCown, McCullum, McDaniel, McDonnell,
McDonald, McElroy, McFadden, McFarland, McGowan, McIntire, McKeen,
McKey, McKnight, McKenzie, McLean, McNeal, McPherson, McQuestion,
Mooney, Montgomery, Moore, Murphy, Ryan, Powers, Welch, etc., were
entered side by side with their English neighbors, so that there is no
question that Boston had within its borders when the Revolution broke
out, a large share of that stock,—the Irish—which made its influence
felt during the struggle, and which furnished in the massacre one of the
first victims, in the person of Patrick Carr.

Besides Boston, there were few towns in New England where an Irishman
could not be found between 1700 and 1800. In the contingent from
Ipswich, Mass., in 1755, at Lake George, were John Fitzpatrick, William
Connolly and Thomas Looney, and in the records of deaths in the town’s
history is that of James Fitzgerald, who died in 1727. Americans bearing
these names, some of them changed slightly, are found all over the
country—Fitzes and Geralds, Patricks, and Connollys, the latter changed
to Colony and Collony. The modern Fitzes discard any but a Norman
origin, however, and the Patricks are, of course, “Scotch-Irish.”

Jeremiah Smith, born in Ireland in 1705, came to Massachusetts in 1726,
locating at Milton. He was accompanied by his wife. He was the first to
raise potatoes in the town, and the first to manufacture paper in the
colony, and perhaps in the country. A neighbor of his, a Mr. Babcock,
having raised two bushels of potatoes from seed given him by Mr. Smith,
came to the latter and told him he did not know what on earth to do with
so many. Mr. Smith told him not to fret, he would buy them of him.
Babcock said he did not know what to do with his Irish help; they did
not understand raising American vegetables; he sent one of them out to
get some green corn for dinner the other day, and he came back without
any, saying that “he had dug up five or six hills, and the divil a
kernel of corn could he find.” Smith told him that the Irish knew as
much about raising corn as the Americans did about raising potatoes, and
knew less how to use them. Smith was a member of the Presbyterian Church
in Boston. He bears honorable mention in the town history, and was
respected by all his fellow-townsmen. He died in 1790.

John Sullivan was also interested in the manufacture of paper, in that
section, between 1780 and 1790, and associated with him in the business
were Patrick Connor and Michael McCarney. Others of Irish birth in the
town at the same time, who were prominent in its affairs, were Peter
O’Kelly, Hugh McLean, Peter McElroy and James McClary. That was quite a
group of Irishmen in a suburb of Boston, and there was no question but
that they were men of enterprise and push. O’Kelly, with his wife and
six children, went to South Carolina in 1796. McCarney was one of a
corporation, organized in 1798, the Mill Creek and Neponset River
Company, for the manufacture of paper. Their mills were situated near
where the chocolate manufactory of Walter Baker was afterwards located.
McCleary’s name appears on the rolls of the Charitable Irish Society in
1789. This is one of the names noted in New Hampshire’s military and
civil history. Maj. Andrew McClary, of Stark’s regiment, was killed at
Bunker Hill. He was one of the finest looking, as he was one of the
bravest, men in the army, and his death was then looked upon as a great
loss to the cause of Independence.

Among those who went with a colony from the Massachusetts Bay to
Delaware, in 1644, were John Nolin and his wife. The Swedes, who were
already located there, looked upon the newcomers as interlopers, and
made it very unpleasant for them. The result was the appointment of a
commission to investigate the alleged outrage on the Massachusetts men.
John Nolin was one of the principal witnesses, the Swedish governor
having placed him in irons. Nolan was undoubtedly the correct way of
spelling the name, and it would not be at all surprising if, like Darby
Field of New Hampshire, he was one of the “Irish soldiers for
discovery.”

John Patrick of Barre, Mass., was a lieutenant in the company recruited
in that town, at the outbreak of the Revolution. His father was an
emigrant from Ireland, and the original name was Kilpatrick. His
descendants are scattered through New England, and like all sprung from
Gaelic stock, have been prolific. He died in 1807, aged sixty-eight.
Gen. M. R. Patrick, provost marshal of the Army of the Potomac, and at
his death superintendent of the Soldiers’ Home at Dayton, Ohio, was one
of his descendants. In harmony with the usage of the day, the
descendants of the lieutenant derive a “Scotch-Irish” ancestry for the
founder of the family.

Among the births recorded in Boston in the returns of births and
baptisms, from 1630 to 1699, are Francis, son of Thaddeus and Eliza
MacCarty, February 19, 1666; Thaddeus, son of the same parents, in
September, 1670; Margaret, born February 25, 1676; Catherine, born
January 23, 1679, of the same parents; Elizabeth, daughter of Florence
and Elizabeth MacCarty, born December 25, 1687; Thomas, son of the same,
born February 5, 1688 (evidently a mistake in dates); William, son of
the same, born February 3, 1690. Mrs. Eliza MacCarty died July 6, 1696.
Florence waited a little over a year before taking another partner, but
not thinking it best to live alone, he married Sarah Newwork on August
24, 1697. She presented him with another Sarah in 1698.

The William MacCarty mentioned, became a noted shipmaster, and had the
reputation of being a fine navigator. He was an enterprising man, fully
up to the standard reached by his father and grandfather. The son, Rev.
Thaddeus MacCarty, born in 1721, was a graduate of Harvard College and a
minister in the Congregational Church. He was called to the pastorate of
the first parish in Worcester, in 1746, where he remained thirty-seven
years. He married a Welsh girl, and by her had fifteen children. He is
described as being tall and slender, with dark eyes, sonorous voice and
very pleasing address. He was a prolific writer, and like James Sullivan
of another Munster family, one of the most scholarly men of his day; he
died in 1784. His son, Thaddeus, born in 1747, was a noted medical
practitioner. He first located in Dudley, then changed to Fitchburg,
Mass., where he established a hospital for the treatment of smallpox by
the Suttonian method. Here at one time he had 800 patients. He
afterwards removed to Keene, N. H.

Another son, William MacCarty, was quartermaster of Colonel Bigelow’s
Fifteenth Massachusetts Regiment in the Revolutionary War. Thus, in
Massachusetts, three of the best known South of Ireland families,
O’Brien (in Maine), MacCarty and Sullivan, were represented before and
during the Revolution; and it is pleasant to record that all were true
to the cause of Independence.

The Mackues had a representative in Timothy, son of Timothy and Ann
Mackue, born October 20, 1699, probably one of the McCues or McHughes,
all the same. Sarah, daughter of William and Olive McLoughlin, was born
on October 29, 1689; and Eliza followed on September 10, 1691, who was
joined by Mary, born on March 22, 1694. These undoubtedly are the
ancestors of many McGloughlins, McLathlans, or Lafflins, as the fancy
seized their descendants to alter the spelling, just as the name
McCarthy became in time Maccarty, Maccartie, MacCarter, Carter or Carte,
varied occasionally by Carty. On February 14, 1658, not a great many
years after the founding of the colony, “James Webster a Scotishman &
Mary Hay an Irish maid were married.” Mary was, no doubt, one of the
poor girls torn from her home in Ireland, but hard as her lot was, she
was fortunate in not being sent to the West Indies; but would it not be
of interest to find, at the present time, the descendants of the Scotch
laddie and the Irish lassie, the Websters of 1658?

Another couple, married April 5, 1692, bear names that denote Irish
blood—Andrew Rankins and Grace Butler. The ceremony was performed by
Gov. Simon Bradstreet. Daniel, son of Dermin—probably Dermot—Mahoone,
was born Oct. 4, 1646. The next child born to the couple, on August 29,
1648, bore the well-known Irish name of Honour, and the name itself must
have been Mahon, or Mahoney. Mrs. Mahone died November 8, 1656, and her
husband, like his countryman, McCarty, did not remain single long, as
another child, Margaret, was presented him on June 3, 1661, but it was
after his death, which took place on April 2, 1661. His widow, Margaret,
did not long grieve for him, for in the following July, 1661, the record
reads, “Bryan Morfrey (Murphy) an Irishman & Margaret Mayhoone widow
were married 20th July by John Endecott Governor.”

The Murphys were on hand “airly,” and no doubt made their mark, but
where are their descendants? Hannah, daughter of John and Ann Cogan, was
born September 6, 1636. This may be one of the characteristic names of
England, but is more common in Ireland, being carried there by Milo De
Cogan, one of Strongbow’s Norman knights. John was born to Garrett and
Mary Bourne, May 30, 1643. Both given and proper names have an Irish
appearance. The first Kelly having the honor of being entered on the
records of births was Daniel, son of David and Elizabeth Kelly, born
December 18, 1647; like the Murphys, they were on hand early; and also
like the Murphys, are of the undiluted old stock, Gaelic to the core.
Today, on account of the prominence of the name, it is as American as it
is Irish, and what is still better, the spelling remains the same in
both countries.

The first Butler, who heads the roll of a long line of descendants, and
a representative of one of the most illustrious names on two continents,
makes his bow in August, 1653, in the person of Benjamin, son of Stephen
and Jane Butler. November, 1656, “Edmond Coussins of Pulling Point and
Margaret Bird an Irish maid servant to John Grover of Rumney Marsh were
married.” An Irish linnet to a French Huguenot, probably. Mary and John
Bohanno, another Scotch laddie, and an Irish lass, were blessed with a
little Mary on May 9, 1658. From these records it can be safely inferred
that the exiles from Scotland and Ireland, the victims of Cromwell’s
tyranny, were, in their persons, uniting the two branches of the old
Gaelic race, as frequent mention is made of marriages between them.

Bohanno was undoubtedly Bohan or Buchanan, both from the same root. John
Morrell, an Irishman, and Lysbell Morrell, an Irishwoman, were married,
August 31, 1659. March 15, 1661, John Reylean, an Irishman, and Margaret
Brene, an Irishwoman, were married by John Endicott, Governor. John, son
of John and Sarah Starkey, was born on September 23, 1666, abbreviated
later on to Stark. Barry appears on the roll, January 8, 1688. James,
son of James, being born on that date. Kenney does not appear until
1691, when, on February 13, Moses and Margaret Kenny were blessed with
the gift of a daughter. Like Butler and Kelly, this is not one of the
most common names in America, as it is in Ireland—McKenna, Kenna, Kenny.
Mulligan turns up in 1681, in the person of Robert, son of Hugh and
Eleanor Mulligan, born on August 9. The Millikens and Mullikens can
trace the stream and find the source, perhaps, here. Morrissey (spelled
Morris and Morrisse) appears in 1655.

Edward Morris and Dermon (Dermot) and Honora Morrisse are mentioned
quite often—some of the transports, undoubtedly. Another of the exiles,
or the child of one, was Johanna Heffernan who married Christopher Vale
in 1692. Mary Lynch married James Townsend in 1693, and Henry Townsen
wedded Mary Keefe the same year—two more “Scotch-Irish” unions if names
are an index to nationality—and still another at the same time was that
of Mary Peard to Samuel Swetman.

The good old name of Hayes, in the persons of Thomas and his wife,
Bridget, shows up July 25, 1690, when unto them a child was born, named
Eliza. This is like some other names mentioned, found now all over the
country; in this case, Bridget must be the Eve of the modern Garden of
Eden—the Hub—at least so far as the Hayes’ are concerned, for she was
the first of the tribe in the Trimountain Paradise. Reilly has two
representatives in John and Bridget Rylee, who had born to them on
September 10, 1693, a daughter, Hannah. After 1700, Irish names peculiar
to the South, as well as the North of Ireland, rapidly appear. In the
records of the selectmen of the town of Boston, September 27, 1736, John
Savell was required to give a bond for a servant imported from Ireland
by Captain Arnold. James Wimble had to do the same for George Lucas’
wife and child from Ireland.

Captain John Carrell—Carroll—ditto, for twelve persons he brought from
Ireland in his vessel. Dinish and Honor Cniae—Kenna—and their two boys,
were of this number. September 29, Joshua Winslow, Esq., gave a bond for
William Steward, wife and two children, imported by Captain Boyd.
Steward was a cooper, and in the following November was admitted an
inhabitant of the town.




                        THE IRISH IN AMERICA.[7]

                  BY HERBERT N. CASSON, NEW YORK CITY.


Footnote 7:

  Published originally in _Munsey’s Magazine_, New York, April, 1906.

A certain green isle in a northerly sea is the historic home of the
Irish people, but the present address of at least two thirds of the
scattered race is “United States of America.” Boston, not Belfast nor
Dublin, is now the greatest Irish city in the world; and the
overwhelming majority of Irishmen who have risen to places of
distinction have done so under the Stars and Stripes.

The historian who shall do full justice to the Irish branch of the human
family has not yet appeared, either in the United States or elsewhere.
Consequently, there are few races, if any, which have been so
persistently misunderstood and undervalued. Even in this country, where
such a mistake is least excusable, there has been a tendency in some
quarters to regard the Irish as merely an element of the rank and file.
The truth is that they have contributed their share of leaders and
pioneers in almost every line of progress.

_At least seven of our presidents_ have had more or less of Irish blood
in their veins. Jackson, Buchanan and Arthur were the sons of Ulster
parents; and the first American ancestor of Polk was an Irish immigrant.
Monroe and McKinley were more remotely related to the “fighting race.”
The latter, it is well known, was fond of saying, “We Irish.” Roosevelt,
also, had several Hibernian twigs on his family tree. This, in itself,
is an amazing record of Celtic leadership—to have helped to mold the
character of seven American presidents out of twenty-five.

In the making of America, the Irish have been structural. No other word
represents their influence so well. In the clearing of forests, the
digging of canals, the building of railroads, and the extension of
commerce, our civilization owes an incalculable debt to Irish hands and
Irish heads.

In the traits of our national character, too, we Americans are all more
Irish than we realize. Our versatility and buoyancy, our quickness of
initiative, our free and unconventional ways, and the sporting instinct
that leads us to take chances and beat records, are a few of the
evidences of an Irish strain in our blood.

If the handiwork of the Irish were painted green, the average American
city would be splashed on all sides with emerald hues. Yet there are few
who are aware of this, even among the Irish themselves. A New Yorker,
for example, may rise in the morning, bathe in water that comes from the
Croton dam, built by James Coleman, ex-president of the Friendly Sons of
St. Patrick; breakfast on Cudahy bacon; then take the subway, built by
John B. McDonald, past the new College of the City of New York, built by
Thomas Dwyer, to his office in a skyscraper built by John D. Crimmins,
where he will cable to Alaska over a line laid by David Lynch, to order
certain freight sent _via_ James J. Hill’s Great Northern Railroad.
Then, with a cigar bought from one of George J. Whelan’s 300 cigar
stores, he will read the New York _Sun_, published by William M. Laffan
and delivered by the American News Company, founded by Patrick
Farrelly—and remark to an English friend:

“Yes, of course, this is an Anglo-Saxon country.”

When J. I. C. Clarke, the genial playwright, wrote his famous poem on
“Kelly and Burke and Shea,” it was generally supposed to be a poetic
fancy. On the contrary, I find it to be a simple matter of American
history that the Kellys, the Burkes and the Sheas have been to the fore
in every generation. They were all three in the battle of Lexington, as
well as in the death-list of the _Maine_. When Hobson sank the
_Merrimac_, a Kelly and a Murphy were his comrades in danger. Our first
noted woman abolitionist was Abbie Kelley. William Darrah Kelley, of
Philadelphia, was a Congressman for nearly thirty years. Hall Jackson
Kelley was the founder of Oregon. The late Eugene Kelly, the New York
banker, won renown as a philanthropist. Among the living members of this
redoubtable family, James E. Kelly is a well-known electrical engineer.
The Kelly Ax Company has a fifty-acre plant in Charleston, W. Va.
Elsewhere * * * you will find the wonderful story of William Kelly,
whose invention has added hundreds of millions to the wealth of the
steel industry.

In the Burke family, three heroic figures appear in the first chapter of
our Revolutionary history—Thomas Burke, the first governor of North
Carolina; Adamus Burke, chancellor of South Carolina; and John Daly
Burk, historian, patriot and duelist. All three were fighters with pen
and sword, who made an indelible mark on the Southern states a century
ago. In 1872, when Froude cast some aspersions upon the Irish, it was
Father Thomas Burke who took up the cudgels against him. And at the
present time we have Burkes enough in the United States to fill a
“Burke’s Peerage” of their own. There are two bishops who bear the
famous name, at Albany and St. Joseph; one brigadier-general, at
Portland, Oregon; one congressman, in South Dakota; a railroad
president, at Cleveland; and a judge at Seattle.

As for the Sheas, at least four of them have buffeted their way to the
front—Gen. John Shea,[8] who won his laurels in the Revolution; Capt.
Daniel Shays, who first fought at Bunker Hill and then stirred up a
little side-show rebellion on his own account; George A. Shea, an
eminent chief justice of New York; and John Gilmary Shea, the historian
of the Catholic Church in the United States.

Footnote 8:

  Gen. John Shee.

In the American business world of today, a large proportion of the solid
men—the men who stand like pillars under the heavy burdens—are of Irish
blood. Most conspicuous of all stands the financier upon whom the mantle
of J. Pierpont Morgan seems to have fallen—the man who is not only
combining but coördinating American capital—Thomas Fortune Ryan. He is
one of the greatest masters of financial statesmanship, who cuts the
Gordian knots of finance and ties others of his own.

Equally immovable, in a different field, stands James J. Hill, born in
Canada of Ulster parents. What this one man has done for the United
States has never yet been fully told. He is the creator of the
Northwest—the railway builder who has opened up a territory equal to a
couple of Germanys—the steamship builder who has linked America with the
markets of the East. He has made wide pathways of commerce from Lake
Superior across 1,500 miles of wilderness and 5,000 miles of ocean to
the ports of China, Russia and Japan. Ever since he double-earned his
first dollar as a Mississippi roustabout, fifty years ago, his life has
been a continuous obstacle-race; and there have been few occasions when
James J. Hill missed a hurdle.

Two other railway presidents are Samuel Sloan, of New York, who was born
when Madison was in the White House; and Richard C. Kerens, of St.
Louis. Daniel O’Day[9]—every inch of him Irish—is one of the most
important members of the imperial group of financiers who float the flag
of Standard Oil. Forty years since, he was a laborer in the oil regions,
whose main problem was to find a job; today, as he jokingly says to his
friends, his main problem is to find out how to invest his surplus.
Another New Yorker of Titanic mold is Alexander E. Orr, who was nineteen
years old before he had seen any other country than Ireland. As a
president of large commercial bodies, he has few equals. He is a
director who directs. For nearly fifty years he has stood under the
heaviest responsibilities, and was recently chosen, because of his
ability and uprightness, to preside over the immense interests of the
New York Life Insurance Company.

Footnote 9:

  Recently deceased.

If we speak of great Irish bankers, where is there a large American city
without one? In Pittsburg, for instance, where there are a score of
banks bulging with steel millions, the dean of the financial fraternity
is Thomas Mellon, who, like Alexander E. Orr, was born in Tyrone. In New
York there are three, at least, who are too prominent to miss—Thomas M.
Mulry, the new president of the Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank, which
was wholly Irish in its origin, and which holds a hundred millions in
its vaults; Miles M. O’Brien, who was for some time the president of the
board of education; and Samuel G. Bayne, who is notable for having
organized national banks in seven states. Charles J. Bell is a
conspicuous figure in the national capital, as John C. Davis is in
Wyoming. And in Chicago John R. Walsh has been a notable banker and
capitalist for twenty years. The recent collapse of his financial
structure should not obscure the facts of his extraordinary career. To
begin as a barefooted newsboy, and to struggle to a place of power in
the sixth greatest city in the world, always preferring to fight big
enemies rather than little ones—that was Walsh’s record.

Among the cattle kings of the West are Timothy Kinney, of Wyoming, and
George Russell, of Nevada. Also in Chicago, Milwaukee and Omaha are four
brothers who know something about the cattle and beef trade—four
brothers whose parents left Kilkenny in the forties because black famine
threatened them with starvation; who began their business life with no
more chance of fortune than any day laborer in the United States, and
who are today numbered among the few masters of the food supply of the
world—Michael, Edward A., John and Patrick Cudahy.

Other weighty business men, scattered here and there, are John Flannery,
the Savannah cotton king; Thomas F. Walsh, of Washington, who is the
president of the Irrigation Congress; John D. Crimmins, the contractor
who has added 400 buildings to New York; Patrick F. Murphy, president of
the Mark Cross Company and well known in New York as an after-dinner
speaker; Edward Malley, who began with a pack on his back and has now a
department store in New Haven; Ephraim Dempsie, merchant and public man
of Spokane; P. B. Magrane, a well-known merchant in the shoe city of
Lynn; and William P. Rend, the coal magnate of Chicago.

Among the great Irish merchants of former days, the most notable was A.
T. Stewart, whose New York store was the largest of its kind, either in
America or elsewhere. His capital was $3,000 when he began to sell his
Belfast laces, and more than forty millions when he died.

In the United States, as well as in Great Britain, many of the most
distinguished judges have been of Irish blood. Among the nine justices
who sit supreme over all American courts, two are Irish by descent—Judge
Edward D. White and Judge Joseph McKenna. As yet, no one has compiled a
list of the Irish judges in the various state Supreme Courts; but to
take New York as an instance, we find five who are of unusual
prominence—Martin J. Keogh, Morgan J. O’Brien, James Fitzgerald, George
C. Barrett and Victor J. Dowling. It should also be mentioned that the
chief judge in the Philippine Islands—John T. McDonough, formerly of
Albany—is Irish born. William J. Hynes, too, a lawyer of whom Chicago is
justly proud, began life in County Clare.

To answer fully the question “What have the Irish done for American
education?” would need a small book in itself. Was not the late Pres.
William Rainey Harper, the father of Chicago University, of Irish
descent? This extraordinary man crowded the work of several centuries
into less than fifty years, sacrificed his preferences as a student that
he might carry the heaviest financial responsibilities, and died poor
after having gathered a dozen millions for his university.

Of our Irish born educators, no one outranks William H. Maxwell, who has
been for eight years the superintendent of New York’s public schools.
Under him are 16,000 teachers and more than half a million children, the
most lively and cosmopolitan army of youngsters in the world.
Superintendent Maxwell has had to fight for every inch of progress in
his development of the New York school system; but like the dogged
Ulsterman that he is, he has driven ahead with his far-reaching
projects, no matter whether the hue and cry was with him or against him.

“Nothing is too good,” he says, “for the taxpayer’s child.”

Speaking of public schools, it would be a sin of omission at this point
not to mention the thousands of young women of Irish birth or parentage
who are doing faithful work as schoolteachers in all parts of the United
States.

The number of our Irish professors is comparatively small. Some who
deserve special mention are Maurice F. Egan, of the Catholic University
in Washington; James McMahon, of Cornell; Robert Ellis Thompson, of the
Central High School in Philadelphia; and Thomas C. Hall, of the Union
Theological Seminary in New York. A Gaelic chair was established in 1896
at the Catholic University by the Ancient Order of Hibernians, and is
filled at the present time by Prof. Joseph P. Dunn, who is of American
birth. To John Tyndall, the notable Irish scientist, the United States
owes a double debt, inasmuch as he not only delivered a course of
lectures here in 1872, but devoted the proceeds to the cause of
scientific research in America.

It is very seldom that an Irishman lacks the gift of speech. Take away
our Irish orators and journalists, and this would be a dumb and
cheerless country indeed. Here, for instance, is an offhand list of
Irish writers of the past and present:

Capt. Mayne Reid, the idol of American boys, and a soldier in our War
with Mexico; John Boyle O’Reilly, the editor and poet; FitzJames
O’Brien, who wrote the famous short story, “The Diamond Lens”; Ignatius
Donnelly, the most versatile and picturesque public man of his
generation in Minnesota; Edwin Lawrence Godkin, of the New York _Evening
Post_, a fighter in the high realm of national morality; Henry W. Grady,
editor of the Atlanta _Constitution_; Patrick Walsh, who was editor of
the Augusta _Chronicle_ and represented Georgia in the United States
Senate; and Joseph Medill, founder of the Chicago _Tribune_.

Among those still living are James Jeffrey Roche, now in the consular
service; Joseph Fitzgerald, author and translator; William M. Laffan,
proprietor of the New York _Sun_; George T. Oliver, of the Pittsburg
_Gazette_; Eugene M. O’Neill, of the Pittsburg _Dispatch_; John McLeod
Keating, who won fame by his fight against yellow fever in the South;
and John F. Finerty, the eloquent founder of the Chicago _Citizen_.

Three great publishers of Irish birth have been Mathew Carey, of
Philadelphia, the friend of Lafayette; Robert Bonner, founder of the New
York _Ledger_; and Patrick Donahoe, founder of the Boston _Pilot_ and
_Donahoe’s Magazine_. The name of William Desmond O’Brien, too, deserves
to be included in this paragraph. Mr. O’Brien was a wealthy contractor
of New York who devoted eighteen years of his life to the preparation of
an _Encyclopedia Hibernica_, and who died, broken-hearted, in 1893, with
his great project unfinished. Among Irish-American publishers now
living, the most notable is P. F. Collier, founder of _Collier’s
Weekly_.

This power of expression, which is typical of the Irish race, rises
frequently to the heights of art. The Goddess of Liberty, on the dome of
the Capitol at Washington, was chiseled by the hands of Thomas Crawford,
who was of Irish parentage, and whose son is the well-known novelist, F.
Marion Crawford. Many an American city has been enriched by the genius
of Augustus St. Gaudens, one of the best beloved and most eminent of
American sculptors. The statue upon which St. Gaudens is now working, in
his Vermont studio, is a heroic figure of Parnell for the City of
Dublin, St. Gaudens’ birthplace. Among the landscape painters, Edward
Gay, of New York, has held a place for forty years; and another veteran
artist of Irish birth is William Magrath, who painted “On the Ould
Sod”—a clever study of Irish character that hangs in the Metropolitan
Museum in New York.

It is to Dublin, also, that we are indebted for Victor Herbert, our
popular conductor and composer, and for Patrick Sarsfield Gilmore, the
famous band master of Civil War times. There have not been so many Irish
singers of operatic rank, although the Irishman who cannot sing at all
is as rare as a white blackbird. Probably the most notable was Catherine
Hayes, who arrived in this country in 1851, married an American husband
and settled in California. Among the best-known dramatic stars of Irish
birth now upon the stage are Ada Rehan and James O’Neil, and the elder
John Drew was a son of Erin. Andrew Mack and Chauncey Olcott are the
most popular of those who portray Irish life.

That the Irish have been in politics goes without saying. In most states
they have furnished more than their share, both of bosses and of
reformers. Richard Croker, the Tammany Hall leader, and Charles O’Conor,
who overthrew the Tweed Ring, fairly represent the two contending forces
in American political life. So much has been written indiscriminately of
Irish bossism that it is nothing but fair to state that some of the
present leaders of the “anti-graft” movement are Mayor Dunne, of
Chicago; Mayor Fagan, of Jersey City; District Attorney Moran, of
Boston; and Hugh McCaffrey, a member of Mayor Weaver’s cabinet, in
Philadelphia. The late Patrick A. Collins, congressman, consul-general
in London and mayor of Boston, was for years the foremost Irishman in
New England.

In the present Congress there are dozens of members of Irish descent,
but only three of Irish birth—Senator Thomas M. Patterson, of Denver,
who has been for thirty years a national figure; Representative Bourke
Cockran, who is unequaled in the Celtic flow of his eloquence; and
Delegate Bernard S. Rodney, of New Mexico. Senator Thomas Kearns, one of
the solid pillars of the state of Utah, was born in Canada of Irish
parents; and James D. Phelan, the well-known Californian, was the son of
a wealthy Irish merchant of San Francisco. Three other public men of
Irish birth are Thomas Taggart, of Indianapolis; William McAdoo, of New
York; and ex-Governor James E. Boyd, of Nebraska. And no Irishman will
ever allow the fact to be forgotten that James G. Blaine, one of the
greatest figures in all American political history, was of Irish
descent. His great-grandfather, Ephraim Blaine, bore an honorable part
in the Revolutionary struggle, and far back in colonial days the Blaines
were among the hardiest pioneers of the Cumberland Valley.

Rising to the religious world, we find many noted Irish names, alike in
the Protestant and Catholic churches. There are no fewer than
twenty-three bishops and five archbishops in this country who learned
their first prayers on Irish soil. This may also be said of Cardinal
Gibbons, who was born in the United States, but taken to Ireland in
infancy. The five archbishops are John M. Farley, John J. Glennon, John
Ireland, John Joseph Keane, and Patrick John Ryan. When was there ever
before such a distinguished quintet of Johns?

Like St. Gaudens and Herbert, Dr. William S. Rainsford hails from
Dublin. Thirty years ago he entered New York an unknown young curate,
and proceeded to establish the foremost institutional church in America,
having at the present time more than 5,000 members. Unfortunately,
overwork has recently compelled him to resign.

Historically, there have been four Irish churchmen who have wielded a
great influence in American affairs—Father Mathew, the apostle of
temperance, who persuaded 600,000 Americans to sign the pledge;
Archbishop Hughes, of New York, who was sent to England by President
Lincoln during the Civil War; Father Ryan, the poet of the South; and
the Rev. John Hall, the pulpit orator of New York.

Nothing can be more absurd than to speak of the Irish as newcomers in
America. No one but a resurrected mound-builder would be entitled to do
that. For the last thousand years or more, wherever there has been any
great enterprise on foot, in the thick of things there have always been
men with the shamrock in their hearts. The ship that carried Columbus
from the known continent to the unknown had a Galway man aboard—so we
are told on good authority. And one of the maps which cheered Columbus
forward showed a country across the ocean which was called “Great
Ireland.” This far western land had been discovered, it was reported, by
St. Brendan, an Irish monk, eight or nine centuries before.

There were a few Irish on the _Mayflower_, but the first large body
arrived about twenty years later. There were five or six hundred of
them—a forlorn and pitiful mob, forcibly transported from their native
land. Those were the black days of Cromwell, when $25 was paid for the
head of a wolf and $50 for the head of a patriot Irishman. In ten years
probably 100,000 were driven out, and many of them came to the American
colonies.

The first big Irishman in our colonial history was Gov. Thomas Dongan,
who gave New York its earliest charter, and who deserves to be called
one of the pioneer champions of popular rights in America. The second
was the distinguished philosopher, Bishop Berkeley, who came from Derry
to Rhode Island in 1728, lured by a missionary enterprise that failed.
All through the eighteenth century came a steady stream of the exiled
Irish—men and women who had been toughened in a terrible school, and who
were fit and ready for the perils of the American wilderness. Most of
them were from the north of Ireland—from little Ulster, that
giant-breeding province whose sons have made history in almost every
country of the earth. They were the first across the Alleghanies. They
settled Tennessee, Kentucky, West Virginia and the coal and iron regions
of Pennsylvania. Such men as Daniel Boone, Davy Crockett and Matthew
Lyon were their leaders. It was they who colonized Ulster County in New
York and Londonderry in New Hampshire. The colonial hero of the
Catskills was Timothy Murphy—so wrote Jay Gould in his famous _History
of Delaware County_, published fifty years ago.

When the War of Independence began there were Irish on the firing-line
everywhere. They had a personal as well as a colonial grievance against
Great Britain; and here was a chance, at last, to even up old scores. A
writer of those times describes them as “a hardy, brave, hot-headed
race; excitable in temper; unrestrainable in passion; invincible in
prejudice. They are impatient of restraint, and rebellious against
anything that in their eyes bears the resemblance of injustice. They
were the readiest of the ready on the battlefields of the Revolution.”
These were not parlor virtues, but they were the kind that founded the
American republic. “You lost America by the Irish,” declared Lord
Mountjoy in the British Parliament.

In those critical days, while thousands were dilly-dallying, the Irish
were hot for action. It was John Sullivan who struck the first blow,
four months before the historic skirmish at Lexington, by capturing
military stores at Portsmouth. The Sullivan family, of which he was a
member, furnished three governors for the young republic. Their mother,
in her old age, used to say that she had often worked in the fields
carrying the governor of Massachusetts, while the governors of New
Hampshire and Vermont tagged at her skirts. The first British warship
was captured by an O’Brien; and John Barry became the official father of
the American navy by receiving the earliest commission as captain. The
first American general to fall was the brilliant Richard Montgomery,
whose virtues compelled even Lord North to lament his death. It is an
interesting fact, and one of which few are aware, that the three
monuments in front of New York’s oldest church—St. Paul’s, on lower
Broadway, are in memory of three famous Irishmen—General Montgomery,
Thomas Addis Emmet and Dr. William MacNevin, the first scientific
chemist of New York.

In 1776 three of the signers were of Irish birth—Matthew Thornton, James
Smith and George Taylor. Five others, at least, were of Irish
blood—Edward Rutledge, Thomas Lynch, Thomas McKean, George Reed and
Charles Carroll of Carrollton. The secretary of the assemblage, who read
aloud the Declaration on the birth-morning of our republic, was Charles
Thompson, Irish born and the son of an evicted farmer. And one of the
first societies to back George Washington with men and money was the
Friendly Sons of St. Patrick of Philadelphia, who raised half a million
dollars and swung into line with a cheer. Only one of their members
objected, and his name was struck from the society’s rolls. Washington
was a frequent guest at their banquets and an honorary member, as
President Roosevelt is of the same society in New York.

No history of the Revolution is complete without its Irish chapter. What
with the dashing work of the Irish Brigade under Count Dillon; with the
exploits of Mad Anthony Wayne and General Moylan, the Murat of the
Revolutionary cavalry; and with the powerful aid of Burke and Sheridan
in England, King George the Third found himself beset by Irishmen from
all quarters. There were whole companies of Irishmen who fought for
American independence under their own green flag, as loyal to their
adopted country as to the land of their birth.

The most typical Irishman of pioneer times was Andrew Jackson, our
seventh president. One secret of his greatness lay in the fact that
there were many men of his mold and nationality in every American
community. It is a fact that should cause every Irish heart to beat with
pride that the first American president who rose from the rank and file,
without the prestige of aristocratic birth or the polish of education,
was the son of a rack-rented exile from Ulster. It may even be true that
he was the first in the world’s history to climb so high, not by force
of arms, but by the free choice of a free people.

“Old Hickory,” as his soldiers called him, has had no superiors as a
popular leader. None of his enemies, and he made many of them, could
question his honesty, his sincerity, his courage. He believed that the
duty of a government was to protect the weak, curb the strong, and obey
public opinion. During his presidency the United States bounded into
industrial greatness and international prestige.

Overlapping Jackson came another typical Irishman, equally great in
peace and war—Gen. James Shields. This remarkable man climbed to fame by
half a dozen various paths. He was the hero of two wars, a judge of the
Illinois Supreme Court, a governor of Oregon, and the only American who
has had the honor of representing three states in the United States
Senate. Like Jackson, he was gentle and chivalrous in private life, and
an incarnate fury on the field of battle. His whole career was one of
romantic knight errantry and adventure. He was a wit and a maker of
epigrams. One of his happiest replies was on one occasion when he was
asked to name his greatest victory.

“My greatest victory,” he answered quickly, “was won on the day when my
sweetheart, Mary Carr, said ‘Yes.’”

After the terrible famine caused by the failure of the potato crop in
1845 and the following years, the Irish poured into America in mighty
hosts. Since that time more than four millions have arrived here, ready
with Celtic buoyancy for the battle of life in a new land, and yet
almost heart-broken to leave the green fields of their fathers.

“Is it hard to die, Barney?” asked a friend of a dying Irishman.

“It is,” replied Barney; “but not so hard as it was to leave Ireland.”

But they went to work with a laugh and an “Irish hurrah.” Whether they
knew it or not, they had arrived when they were most needed. The era of
railroads and steamships had begun. Great cities were being built and
being rebuilt. The factory system was being established in New England.
The iron and steel trade had secured a solid foothold. And so, while the
Irish had nothing to offer at first but labor, labor was what the United
States was most urgently in need of at that stage of its development.

When the Civil War put American manhood to the test the Irish were
everywhere—in the thickets of the Wilderness, at the Bloody Angle of
Gettysburg, on the crimson field of Chancellorsville. Standing for state
rights—the rights of which John C. Calhoun had been the great
exponent—were Gen. Patrick R. Cleburne, Senator Regan, the Texan, and
others. Standing for the Union were Sheridan, Meade and Meagher, whose
dashing valor is one of our national boasts. Unquestionably “Little
Phil” Sheridan deserves a high place, not only among American generals,
but among the foremost military commanders of the world. Today, among
the retired veterans of the United States Army there are three
brigadier-generals of Irish birth—Richard Comba, John J. Coppinger and
William Quinton.[10] There is also one rear-admiral—Joseph Trilley.

Footnote 10:

  To these three should be added: Brig. Gen. Bernard J. D. Irwin, Brig.
  Gen. Michael Cooney, Brig. Gen. James W. Scully, Brig. Gen. Charles P.
  Eagan, Brig. Gen. William E. Dougherty, Brig. Gen. John R. McGinness
  and Brig. Gen. John J. O’Connell, all natives of Ireland.

For more than two hundred years the sons of Ireland have been among the
pathfinders who prepared the way for the American nation in its mighty
sweep from the Atlantic to the Pacific. No region has ever been too
remote or perilous to daunt the Irish pioneer. Whoever discovers the
North Pole will no doubt find a Kelly or an O’Brien already on the spot.
It was Capt. John J. Healy, for instance, who was the commercial
discoverer of Alaska; and when the United States first took possession
of that frozen country, four of the sixteen white men in its largest
settlement were found to be subscribers to the _Irish World_. Gen.
Patrick E. Connor was a trail-maker in Utah, as Philip Nolan and Sam
Houston were in Texas. Henry W. Oliver, the late steel king of
Pittsburg, who had the most dramatic career of ups and downs that
western Pennsylvania has ever known, was the first Pittsburgher to
realize fully the value of the Lake Superior iron ore. In consequence,
he piled up a forty-million fortune. Missouri had Brian Mullanphy, who
left a fortune for the assistance of poor immigrants. In fact, when the
history of any western state is written, it will be found that among the
army that cleared the way there was always an Irish brigade.

The plain, straight truth about the Western Irish is more wonderful than
any fanciful tale woven in the loom of Arabian imagination. Talk about
_Monte Cristo_ or _Sinbad the Sailor_! They are paltry adventurers
compared with men like John W. Mackay or Marcus Daly. With his three
partners, also Irish—James C. Flood, James G. Fair and William S.
O’Brien—John W. Mackay changed the silver markets of the world. Within a
comparatively few years these four men took a treasure of $150,000,000
from one hole in the side of a Nevada mountain—the famous Comstock lode.
Always ready for big enterprises, Mackay put his millions behind James
Gordon Bennett’s dream to link America and Europe together by an
Atlantic cable, and drove the scheme ahead to complete success. What
Marcus Daly did in Montana was different only in detail. He, too,
“grasped the skirts of happy chance” with a grip that landed him and his
friends among the most powerful money kings of his generation.

All five of these Irishmen began at the lowest rung of the ladder. They
made themselves the leaders in a country of strong and daring men, by
being the strongest and most daring of all. And today their children
have linked their fathers’ names by marriage with some of the proudest
families in the older states—the Oelrichses, Vanderbilts, Duers and
Girards, as well as to the princely Colonnas of Italy.

Whether it is the versatile genius of the Emmets of New York; or the
fighting pluck of “Bucky” O’Neil, who was killed with the Rough Riders
at Santiago; or the sagacity of John Mitchell, who is the leader of
150,000 miners—whether it is the sheer brain force and inventiveness of
a Fulton, a Morse or a McCormick, or the quaint and witty wisdom of “Mr.
Dooley,” there have always been qualities of the Irish head and the
Irish heart that brought honor to the little home-land of the Celt.

“There is nothing negative about the Irish,” said Patrick Ford—which is
exactly what anyone who knows the rugged old journalist would have
expected him to say. They may be on the wrong side of the quarrel, but
one thing is always certain—they are never on the fence. They care
little or nothing for obstacles and adverse circumstances. They are the
best of friends and the best of enemies—the quickest with either the
open hand or the fist—the most loyal to a cause and the most rebellious
against a tyranny. They live closest to hope and farthest from despair.

“Why,” said Maurice Healy, an Alaskan fur trader, “I’m only 700 miles
from a bank!”

You can bend and twist an Irishman, but you can seldom break him—the
records of insanity and suicide prove this. He “works hard in time of
peace and fights hard in time of war,” as President Roosevelt has said.
Impulsive, daring, constructive, indomitable, the Irishman has done
indispensable work in this land of his choice.

“May his shadow never grow less!”—so say we all.




                          REVIEW OF THE YEAR.

  LEADING EVENTS IN THE CAREER OF THE SOCIETY, FOR 1906, OR OF SPECIAL
                        INTEREST TO THE MEMBERS.


 Jan.   4.  Death of P. J. Kenedy, New York, senior member of the firm
            of P. J. Kenedy & Sons, publishers. Mr. Kenedy was a member
            of the Society.

 Jan.   6.  The U. S. gunboat _Hist_ arrived at the Charlestown (Mass.)
            navy yard today from Newport, R. I. Chief Boatswain Hugh
            Sweeney, who was in command, immediately turned the vessel
            over to Boatswain Patrick Shanahan and returned to Newport.

 Jan.  10.  Thirtieth meeting of the council of the Society is held
            this evening at Providence, R. I. Hon. Thomas Z. Lee of
            Providence presides.

 Jan.  10.  Following the council meeting just mentioned the members
            and friends partook of dinner at the Narragansett Hotel,
            Providence.

 Jan.  18.  Annual meeting and dinner of the Society. The event took
            place at the Hotel Manhattan, 42d Street and Madison Avenue,
            New York.

 Jan.  18.  A dinner to James McMahon was given at the Waldorf-Astoria,
            New York, tonight, by the officers of the Emigrant
            Industrial Savings Bank, that city. Mr. McMahon retires from
            the presidency of the bank after fourteen years’ service. He
            is a member of the Society.

 Jan.  29.  Death of Ambrose F. Travers, New York, a member of the
            Society.

 Feb.   1.  Governor Swanson of Virginia is inaugurated. He has
            appointed Hon. Joseph T. Lawless, of Norfolk, a member of
            the Society, to be a colonel on his staff.

 Feb.   4.  Capt. James Connolly of Coronado, Cal., a member of the
            Society, writes to Secretary Murray that he has contracted
            with a Boston publisher to bring out a volume of verse
            entitled “The Jewels of King Art,” in commemoration of a
            famous Irish monarch.

 Feb.  18.  John A. McCall, a life member of the Society, dies at
            Lakewood, N. J.

 Feb.  21.  Rev. John F. Leary, rector of St. Michael’s Church, Chapman,
            Kan., and chaplain of the Grand Army of the Republic, died
            on this date. He was a native of Ogdensburg, N. Y. During
            the Civil War he served as a member of the Fifteenth New
            York Engineers. That was before he became a priest. He was
            in the engagements at the Wilderness, Spottsylvania and
            Appomatox. Though he was wounded at Bermuda Hundred, he was
            able to get back to his regiment in time to be in at the
            finish at Appomatox Courthouse. Father Leary was elected
            chaplain-in-chief of the Grand Army of the Republic at the
            national encampment held last September.

 Feb.  28.  George T. Little, librarian of Bowdoin College, requests a
            copy of Volume II of the Journal of the Society for that
            institution. He states that the college is already in
            possession of the other volumes of the series.

 March.     Rev. Cyrus Townsend Brady, LL. D., of the Society, is the
            author of a volume brought out this month entitled, _The
            True Andrew Jackson_. It is illustrated, comprises 503
            pages, and is dedicated as follows: “To that most useful and
            eminent citizen, John D. Crimmins, and our fellow-members of
            the American-Irish Historical Society, I dedicate this
            appreciation of the greatest among the many of Irish lineage
            who have contributed to the upbuilding of the republic.”

 March  2.  The State Historical Society of Missouri, by its secretary,
            expresses a desire to secure copies of the publications of
            our Society.

 March  8.  Cyril Crimmins, a son of Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York,
            becomes a life member of the Society.

 March  9.  Frederick H. Hild, librarian of the Chicago Public Library,
            writes that the library is desirous of having a complete set
            of the Journal of the Society, and also copies of such other
            publications as may be issued.

 March 12.  The Rhode Island state house commissioners granted this
            afternoon, permission to the Society to erect a tablet in
            the edifice to Gen. John Sullivan of the Revolution.

 March 13.  The Providence (R. I.) _Evening Tribune_ contains an
            interesting article on the memorial tablet which the Society
            purposes erecting in the state capitol, Providence, to
            Maj.-Gen. John Sullivan of the Revolution.

 March 14.  An article on Maj.-Gen. John Sullivan is published in the
            Providence (R. I.) _Evening Tribune_ today, accompanied by
            his portrait.

 March 15.  Most Rev. Robert Seton, titular archbishop of Heliopolis,
            lectured at the Irish College, Rome, today, on The Irish in
            America. Among those present was Cardinal Michael Logue,
            archbishop of Armagh, and primate of all Ireland.

 March 24.  A despatch from Montreal, this date, states that the Oakhall
            restaurant, corner of St. Peter and Notre Dame streets, that
            city, was burned out last night. Special interest centres
            in the fact that the building was occupied in 1775 as the
            headquarters of Gen. Richard Montgomery and staff of the
            American army in Montreal.

 March 28.  Melvin G. Dodge, librarian of Leland Stanford Junior
            University, California, wishes copies of Volumes I and III
            of the Journal of the Society for that institution. He
            writes us to that effect.

 March 31.  Gaelic Notes in this week’s New York _Irish World_ has the
            following: “Now that the question of teaching Irish history
            in the schools has again come to the front, we would repeat
            the suggestion made by us a couple of years ago to the
            American-Irish Historical Society, that in no possible way
            could it so promote the objects for which it is organized as
            by the preparation of a popular text-book of the history of
            the race in America, suitable for the use of schools. The
            Society has the material for doing this; it could do it
            without loss to itself, and with great profit to the race,
            which it would thus have put under a debt of gratitude.”

 April.     Death of Gen. M. T. McMahon at his home in New York City.
            He was a judge of the New York Court of General Sessions
            at the time of his death. He had practised law in New York
            for many years and was a fine speaker, but he was known
            chiefly as a soldier. He was educated at St. John’s College,
            Fordham, from which he graduated in 1855, and then went
            to Buffalo, where he studied law in the office of Eli Cook,
            then mayor of the city, in company with Grover Cleveland,
            since president of the United States. Although able to pass
            the examination, he was too young to be admitted to the
            bar, and he became a correspondence clerk in the general
            post-office at Washington. In President Buchanan’s
            administration he was appointed special post-office agent
            to the Pacific coast. He was admitted to the bar at
            Sacramento in 1861. At the first call for troops at the
            breaking out of the Civil War he raised the first company
            of cavalry on the Pacific. He was elected captain of the
            company, but when it was decided that the company should
            not go to the front he resigned and went to Washington.
            He was made a captain in the regular army and an
            aide-de-camp to Gen. George B. McClellan, whose bosom friend
            he remained until “Little Mac’s” death. He served in every
            engagement in which the Army of the Potomac took part. When
            the Sixth Corps was disbanded he was adjutant-general and
            chief of staff. He also served under Generals Franklin,
            Sedgwick (who was killed at the Wilderness), Baldy Smith
            and Wright. He received the congressional medal of honor
            for bravery at the battle of White Oak Swamp. Congress also
            presented him with a jeweled sword for conspicuous bravery
            at Spottsylvania and other battles. At the close of the
            war he was assigned as adjutant-general under General Dix,
            to the Department of the East. He resigned in 1866 and
            became corporation attorney of New York City. President
            Johnson made him minister to Paraguay. In 1879 he ran for
            Congress against Robert B. Roosevelt and was defeated. Two
            years later he was appointed receiver of taxes by Andrew
            H. Green, then comptroller. He was United States marshal
            for the Southern District of New York under President
            Cleveland. After that he was an assemblyman and a state
            senator. For years he had been one of the managers of the
            National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers. In 1896 he
            was elected judge of the Court of General Sessions. General
            McMahon was a Fenian and was ready for service in Ireland.
            He was also a member of the Clan-na-Gael in its earlier
            days. His brother, John E. McMahon, who was attorney-general
            and adjutant-general of New York state under Governor
            Seymour, was colonel of the One Hundred and Sixty-fourth
            New York Volunteers, which he raised in Buffalo at the
            outbreak of the war. The regiment was later consolidated
            with the Phœnix Zouaves, a Fenian regiment, and McMahon
            became colonel. It was part of the Corcoran Legion. Col.
            John E. McMahon was killed at the siege of Suffolk, Va., in
            1863. The other brother, James P. McMahon, was a captain in
            the Sixty-ninth with Thomas Francis Meagher, later became
            lieutenant-colonel of the One Hundred and Fifty-fifth New
            York, and was promoted to be colonel of the One Hundred and
            Sixty-fourth New York, in place of his brother, Martin. He
            remained in command of the latter regiment until he was
            killed in a charge at the battle of Cold Harbor on June 3,
            1864.

 April.     About this time is issued from the Blanchard Press,
            Worcester, Mass., a volume entitled: “A Study in the
            Etymology of the Indian Place Name Missisquoi.” The author
            of the work is George McAleer, M. D., of Worcester, a member
            of our Society.

 April.     The _Munsey Magazine_ (New York) for this month has a paper
            on the Irish in America by Herbert N. Casson.

 April  7.  Death today of Capt. Patrick S. Curry, Lynn, Mass., a
            member of the Society. He passed away at Nashua, N. H.,
            where he had been superintending the construction of a new
            post-office building.

 April  9.  Daniel Walsh, a member of the crew of the _Monitor_ when
            she fought the _Merrimac_, during the Civil War, died in
            Lawrence, Mass. He was a native of Ireland.

 April 18.  Hon. James D. Phelan, ex-mayor of San Francisco, who is
            a member of the Society, is appointed a member of the
            Committee of Safety by Mayor Schmitz of that city, which
            committee is rendered necessary by the great earthquake
            and fire disaster.

 April 18.  E. Festus Kelly, of Northerwood House, Lyndhurst, Hampshire,
            England, expresses his interest in a paper on “The New
            Hampshire Kellys,” which appeared in Volume V of the Journal
            of the Society, and desires a copy of the same.

 April 20.  Patrick J. Meehan, of Jersey City, N. J., editor of the
            _Irish-American_ of New York, the oldest Irish newspaper in
            the United States with the exception of _The Pilot_, and who
            may be styled the Nestor of the Irish-American and Catholic
            journalistic fraternity, died on this date.

 April 20.  A despatch from Lowell, Mass., today states that the
            O’Sullivan Rubber Co., of that city, has wired $500 to the
            mayor of San Francisco to aid the earthquake sufferers. The
            check was signed by Treasurer Humphrey O’Sullivan, who is a
            member of our Society, as is James O’Sullivan, president of
            the company.

 April 25.  At Phalerum, Greece, today, Martin J. Sheridan of the
            Irish-American A. C., New York, won the contest at discus
            throwing. Giorgantas, a Greek, was second.

 April 25.  President Roosevelt, in a proclamation today, urges the
            American people to now send their contributions for the
            alleviation of the distress in San Francisco, directly to
            ex-Mayor James D. Phelan, chairman of the finance committee
            in San Francisco, instead of to the American Red Cross. The
            proclamation goes on to say: “The need of employing the
            Red Cross, save as an auxiliary, has passed, and I urge
            that hereafter all contributions from any source be sent
            direct to James D. Phelan, chairman finance committee, San
            Francisco. Mr. Devine of the Red Cross will disburse any
            contributions sent to him through ex-Mayor Phelan and will
            work in accord with him in all ways.”

 April 26.  Reception this evening to Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S.
            N., the new president-general of the Society. The event took
            place at the residence of Hon. John D. Crimmins, 40 East
            68th Street, New York.

 April 28.  An editorial in the _New Century_, Washington, D. C., this
            date, says: “As an individual contributor to the San
            Francisco relief fund, one notices an Irish name leading all
            the rest—far and above in amount, the generosity of the
            Rockefellers, the Astors and the Vanderbilts. The name is
            that of James D. Phelan, who subscribed $1,000,000. And
            this, notwithstanding that he himself lost $15,000,000 by
            the fire. These great catastrophes always evoke
            large-hearted acts and assure us that neither magnanimity,
            public spirit nor courage have yet vanished from the face of
            the earth. Mr. Phelan’s conduct proclaims him a man worthy
            of his wealth. We learn, further, that he is a Catholic, a
            graduate of a Jesuit college and that he was mayor of San
            Francisco from 1896 to 1902. As he is only forty-five years
            of age, we shall hope to hear more of him hereafter.”

 April-May. A committee organized by Archbishop Farley, of New York,
            for the relief of the San Francisco sufferers, has been
            very successful. Among the members of the Society who have
            contributed to the fund, together with the amount given by
            each, are the following: Archbishop Farley, $1,000; Hon.
            John D. Crimmins, $1,000; Hon. W. Bourke Cochran, $1,000;
            Eugene Kelly, $1,000; James S. Coleman, $300; Francis J.
            Quinlan, M. D., $250; Hon. Morgan J. O’Brien, $250; Edmond
            J. Curry, $100; J. Henry Haggerty, $100; all of New York.
            Mr. Crimmins is treasurer of the fund.

 May     3. Warren Upham, secretary and librarian of the Minnesota
            Historical Society, St. Paul, Minn., writes that the
            organization is desirous of possessing a complete set of the
            Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society.

 May     5. The New York _Irish-American_ for this week has the
            following relative to our San Francisco member, ex-Mayor
            James D. Phelan: “In San Francisco the man of the hour in
            whose hands is the management of the great relief fund,
            and under whose executive direction the important movements
            that are to lift the stricken city up from the depths and
            rebuild her shattered fortunes have already been begun,
            is that well-known Irish-American, James D. Phelan, former
            mayor of the city. Although his personal and business losses
            must reach millions, it is reported that he has devoted
            the sum of $1,000,000 out of his private fortune to employ
            the afflicted laboring people of his native city. Mr.
            Phelan, whose father was one of the men who made San
            Francisco rich and famous, was born in 1861, and was
            educated at St. Ignatius College, in that city, where he
            graduated with honor, after a four years’ course of study.
            He then entered as a student at the law department of the
            University of California, of which he is also a graduate.
            He was selected mayor of the city, as a Democrat, in 1896,
            and served until 1902. His régime was marked by zeal and
            ability in the public service. The Democrats of the state
            Legislature complimented him with their nomination for
            United States senator a few years ago. He is one of the
            leading capitalists of the United States, and has numerous
            commercial and mining interests. He is president of the
            Mutual Savings Bank and the finest business block in San
            Francisco, situated on Market Street, bore his name. It
            withstood the shock of earthquake, but the resulting fire
            reduced it to a mass of smoking ruins. Mr. Phelan has been
            for years a generous supporter of the Irish cause and has
            stood by both Parnell and Redmond with his influence and his
            money. His father aided in receiving Terence Bellew McManus,
            John Mitchel and Thomas Francis Meagher when those patriots
            escaped from the British penal settlements in Australia and
            sought liberty and new careers in America. No city has been
            more generous in aid of Ireland than San Francisco and its
            people, of all races, are renowned for their hospitality
            and liberality, and foremost among those who offered that
            hospitality has always been James D. Phelan. In the new city
            that is to rise triumphant from the ashes of the present
            disaster his grateful fellow-citizens will no doubt give him
            every honor in their bestowal.”

 May   12.  The funeral took place, at Boston today, of Patrick E.
            Flood. He was a member of the crew of the U. S. S.
            _Kearsarge_ when she fought the _Alabama_.

 May   29.  John F. Sweeney, Buffalo, N. Y., becomes a life member of
            the Society.

 May   30.  In the old Granary burying ground, Boston, this morning,
            was unveiled a slab marking the burial place of those who
            fell in the Boston massacre of March 5, 1770, and of a boy
            who was killed on the previous February 22. The modest slab
            of slate is in keeping with the other memorials in this
            historic burying ground. It was erected by Boston Chapter,
            S. A. R., and is the first permanent marker that has been
            placed over these graves. Dr. Samuel Crowell, president
            of the Boston Chapter, unveiled the slab with a brief
            introductory speech, presenting Dr. Moses Greeley Parker
            of Lowell, president of the Massachusetts Society, who
            congratulated Boston Chapter on the work it has done and
            is doing. Edward W. McGlenen, city registrar, of the
            committee, gave a brief historical sketch of the events
            leading up to the massacre, including the shooting of the
            boy, Christopher Snider, by the British soldiers, who fired
            into his father’s house. Little attention has been paid in
            history to the killing of this boy, called on the slab “the
            innocent first victim of the struggles between the colonists
            and the crown.” The slab stands close to the grave of Samuel
            Adams and is in plain view from the street. The inscription
            reads:

                  +-------------------------------------------+
                  |               The Remains of              |
                  |              SAMUEL GRAY                  |
                  |              SAMUEL MAVERICK              |
                  |              JAMES CALDWELL               |
                  |              CRISPUS ATTUCKS              |
                  |                   and                     |
                  |              PATRICK CARR                 |
                  |      Victims of the Boston Massacre       |
                  |            March 5th, 1770                |
                  |    Were here interred by order of the     |
                  |             Town of Boston                |
                  |    Here also lies buried the body of      |
                  |           CHRISTOPHER SNIDER              |
                  |              aged 12 years                |
                  |        Killed February 22nd, 1770         |
                  | The innocent first victim of the struggle |
                  |     between the Colonists and the Crown   |
                  |            which resulted in              |
                  |               INDEPENDENCE                |
                  |     Placed by Boston Chapter, S. A. R.    |
                  |                   1906.                   |
                  +-------------------------------------------+

 June   4.  Hon. Arthur P. Gorman passed away this morning in
            Washington, D. C. He was the senior United States senator
            from Maryland and was the Democratic leader in the upper
            branch of Congress. Deceased was a native of Woodstock, Md.,
            and was born in 1829. His grandfather, John Gorman, came to
            Pennsylvania from Ireland in 1784 and settled in Harrisburg.

 June  13.  John J. Coffey, of Neponset (Boston), Mass., passes away. He
            was a member of the Society and took much interest in the
            work of the latter.

 June  15.  Death of Hon. Michael J. Sullivan, a member of the executive
            council of the governor of Massachusetts, at his home in
            Boston. He worked his way through the Boston University
            Law School and continued his legal studies in the office
            of the Hon. Patrick A. Collins, afterwards mayor, and was
            in July, 1898, admitted to the bar. He was elected a member
            of the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1898, and
            re-elected in 1899. He served on the important committee
            of metropolitan affairs and represented Mayor Collins on
            that committee, looking after the interests of the City
            of Boston. He was a candidate for the state Senate in 1900,
            but was defeated. In the following year he was chosen a
            member of that body, and re-elected in 1902. He was a member
            of the governor’s council in 1904, 1905 and the present
            year. Governors Bates, Douglas and Guild, in whose councils
            Mr. Sullivan served, had high admiration for him. In June,
            1905, he was in charge, officially, of the Massachusetts
            delegation to the Lewis and Clark Exposition in Portland,
            Ore. The state was represented at the funeral by Governor
            Guild, Lieutenant-Governor Draper and members of the
            executive council, Senate and House, and the city by Mayor
            Fitzgerald and members of the board of aldermen and common
            council, and men connected with the different departments.

 July  18.  Death of Patrick F. Sullivan, Boston, Mass., a member of the
            Society.

 July  23.  Hon. John J. Flaherty of Gloucester, Mass., a justice of the
            Superior Court of Massachusetts, died today.

 Aug.  22.  Rev. Denis P. O’Flynn, New York City, a member of the
            Society, passes away.

 Aug.  26.  Death of Col. O’Brien Moore, Tucson, Ariz., a life member of
            the Society.

 Aug.  29.  Col. James Quinlan, a member of the Society, passes away at
            his home in New York City.

 Sept. 25.  Richard Deeves, New York, contributes $100 to the Permanent
            Fund of the Society.

 Oct.   1.  William Pigott, Seattle, Wash., becomes a life member of the
            Society.

 Oct.  12.  The Ninth Massachusetts Regiment, under command of Col.
            William H. Donovan, starts for New York City to participate
            in the dedication of the new armory of the Sixty-ninth
            Regiment, N. G. S. N. Y. With the Ninth went a number of
            invited guests, including Mayor Fitzgerald of Boston, Mayor
            Duggan of Worcester, Mayor Casey of Lowell, Mayor Kane of
            Lawrence and other Massachusetts gentlemen.

 Oct.  13.  Dedication in New York City today of the new armory of the
            Sixty-ninth Regiment. Mr. Justice James Fitzgerald of the
            New York Supreme Court, a member of our Society, presided.

 Oct. 21.   John C. Sullivan, registrar of probate for Plymouth County,
            Mass., was accidentally killed tonight by being struck by a
            trolley car. He was sixty-four years of age and had been
            registrar of Plymouth County for many years. Born in
            Ireland, he came to this country alone when a small boy. He
            attended the local schools and later Peirce Academy and
            Brown University, the latter in Providence, R. I. He
            enlisted during the Civil War and served out his full term,
            being a good soldier and comrade. After the war he was
            admitted to the bar.

 Oct. 29.   Death today of Hon. Robert T. Davis, M. D., of Fall River,
            Mass., a member of the Society.

 Oct. 29.   Reuben G. Thwaites, secretary and superintendent of the
            State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis., writes
            to us saying: “Thank you most cordially for your kindly gift
            of books and pamphlets to our library. We shall certainly
            appreciate them very much indeed. We trust that you will
            continue to favor us with your several publications, as we
            have a very large, growing, and much used collection of
            material in the field in which your Society works.”

 November.  The American-Irish Historical Society this month receives an
            invitation from the American Historical Association to send
            a representation to a conference of historical societies to
            be held in Providence, R. I., December 26–29, 1906.

 Nov.   2.  William Doogue, superintendent of public grounds, Boston,
            Mass., passed away this evening. He was a member of the
            Society.

 Nov.   5.  It is stated that the Hon. Morgan J. O’Brien, presiding
            justice of the appellate division of the New York Supreme
            Court, today filed his resignation with the secretary of
            state at Albany. Judge O’Brien will become a member of a
            prominent New York law firm.

 Nov.   6.  The Hon. James H. Higgins, mayor of Pawtucket, R. I., is
            today elected governor of Rhode Island. He is the first
            Catholic to be elected to the office.

 Nov.   6.  Joseph F. O’Connell, a member of the Society, is today
            elected to Congress from the Tenth Massachusetts district.

 Nov.   6.  Patrick J. McCarthy, a member of the Society, is today
            elected mayor of Providence, R. I.

 Nov.  21.  The secretary of the State Historical Society of Missouri
            writes that he has forwarded us the first number of a
            quarterly review just issued by his society and that they
            shall be glad to place us on their regular mailing list, and
            to receive from us copies of such publications as our
            Society may issue.

 Nov.  23.  The librarian of the public library, St. Louis, Mo., writes
            for two volumes of the Journal of the Society to complete
            the library’s set.

 Nov.  23.  Anniversary of the birth of Edward Rutledge, a signer of the
            Declaration of Independence. He was of Irish parentage.

 Nov.  29.  Anniversary of the birth of Charles Thomson, the “perpetual
            secretary” of Congress; a native of Ireland.

 December.  Hon. George F. O’Neil, Binghamton, N. Y., becomes a life
            member of the Society.

 Dec.   2.  Died on this date, in 1783, Thomas Burke. He was a native of
            Ireland, and was chosen governor of North Carolina in 1781.

 Dec.  11.  A meeting of the council of the Society is held this evening
            in Providence, R. I.




                               NECROLOGY.


The following members of the Society died during the year 1906, much and
deservedly regretted:

  COFFEY, JOHN J., born in County Kerry, Ireland, 1831; died at Neponset
    (Boston), Mass., June 13, 1906. He enlisted for service in the Civil
    War on December 13, 1861, in Company C, Twenty-eighth Massachusetts
    Regiment (the famous Faugh-a-Ballaghs), which formed part of
    Meagher’s Irish Brigade, and he later fought with the Fourth Heavy
    Artillery of Massachusetts. Among the famous battles in which he
    took part were Marye’s Heights, Gettysburg and Fredericksburg. He
    was stricken with rheumatic fever, which necessitated his taking
    furloughs. With the exception of these two absences he served from
    the first year of the war until its conclusion, and was in the army
    which assembled in Washington for review preparatory to its
    disbandment at the close of hostilities. He returned to Boston after
    the war, and was active in military organizations. He joined the
    Montgomery Light Guard Veteran Association and various other Irish
    societies. He was a most patriotic man and an active worker in the
    interests of his native land. He was identified with the Irish
    National League, Irish National Federation and the United Irish
    League. He also belonged to Division 43, A. O. H., the Knights of
    St. Brendan and John A. Andrew Post, No. 5, G. A. R. He is survived
    by his wife and six children: James D. and Timothy J. Coffey of
    Boston; Charles M. Coffey, who has been in the West and Alaska for
    some years, part of the time serving in the United States Cavalry;
    Mrs. George G. White of Dorchester, Mass.; Mrs. William H. Murphy of
    Neponset; and Miss Anna S. Coffey, a teacher in the Henry L. Pierce
    School, Dorchester, who lived with her parents. When a collection of
    articles for an Irish-American loan exhibition for the World’s fair
    at St. Louis, Mo., was being gotten up in 1904, John J. Coffey, the
    subject of this obituary, contributed an Irish flag that had been
    carried during the Civil War by the Twenty-eighth Massachusetts.
    Accompanying the flag, he sent a letter, the following being an
    extract therefrom: “This flag has a precious history. It was
    presented to the Twenty-eighth Regiment, through the late Patrick
    Donahoe, by the Irish women of Boston, on Sept. 24, 1861, at the
    same time Governor Andrew presented the regiment with the flag of
    the State of Massachusetts. My company (C) was selected as the right
    center or color company, and my brother, Michael J., whose height
    exceeded mine by two inches, was selected as color sergeant of this
    green flag, and carried it until he fell mortally wounded at the
    second battle of Bull Run, August 30, 1862; after that it went
    through Chantilly, South Mountain and Antietam. On the memorable day
    of the attack on Marye’s Heights, at Fredericksburg, it was the only
    green flag unfurled—and by this I do not intend to cast any
    reflections on the other four regiments of the Irish Brigade. Some
    time before Chancellorsville, in May following, Colonel Byrnes and
    the other officers of the regiment concluded that it was too
    cumbersome, subscribed among themselves and procured a flag of
    lighter fabric (worsted), and laid the old flag (this one) aside,
    but in safe keeping, and you may rest assured that it has been
    scrupulously cared for and treasured by the custodian.”

  COLEMAN, JAMES S., builder of the new Croton Dam, New York, and street
    cleaning commissioner from 1881 to 1891, died at his home, 38 East
    69th Street, New York City, December 17. Deceased was one of the
    best-known contractors in this country. At the time of his
    appointment as commissioner of street cleaning by Mayor Grace of New
    York he was engaged in the construction of the Texas and Pacific
    Railroad, which work was turned over to other contractors, while
    deceased gave his whole time to the study of his work for the city.
    He was the first commissioner to realize the many commercial uses to
    which city waste might be put, and he so arranged the disposal of
    garbage as to clear for the city $90,000 yearly. Mayor Grace
    appointed him to a six-year term, which continued through the term
    of Mayor Edson, and subsequently he was re-appointed for another
    six-year term by Mayor Hewitt. In 1892 he received the contract for
    the building of the new Croton Dam, and shortly before his death the
    entire work was completed. Deceased was born about sixty-three years
    ago. He came of a family of contractors, his father having engaged
    in that business until his death. He spent his boyhood in Madison,
    N. J. Deceased was prominent in charitable work of an unobtrusive
    sort and was a member of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the
    American Geographical Society and the Manhattan, Catholic and
    Hardware clubs, Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, and was a member of
    the board of managers of the Catholic Orphan Asylum. Funeral
    services were held at St. Patrick’s Cathedral.

  CURRY, CAPT. PATRICK S., born in Ireland; died in Nashua, N. H., April
    7, 1906. He came to this country when a young man, eventually
    settling in Lynn, Mass., where he was long engaged in the granite
    business. During the Civil War he rose from the ranks to command
    Companies C and G of the Third Massachusetts Cavalry, under Banks
    and Sheridan. He was one of the volunteers at the storming of Port
    Hudson, and for his bravery there was given a medal by Congress.
    During the siege of Baton Rouge he was made provost marshal at that
    place. He was wounded several times. In 1883 he was elected
    representative to the Massachusetts General Court from Lynn, and was
    the author of the free text-book bill. He also presented the bill
    abolishing contract labor in prisons. At the time of his death he
    was superintending the construction of a new post-office building in
    Nashua, N. H.

  DAVIS, HON. ROBERT T. (M. D.), born in County Down, Ireland, 1823;
    died in Fall River, Mass., October 29, 1906. He was the son of John
    and Sarah (Thompson) Davis. His father was a Presbyterian and his
    mother a member of the Society of Friends. They came to America in
    1826 and settled in Amesbury, Mass. Doctor Davis was educated in the
    Friends’ School at Providence, R. I., and at Amesbury Academy, and
    began the study of medicine with Dr. Thomas Wilbur, well remembered
    as a leading physician in Fall River. He passed two years at Tremont
    Medical School in Boston and was graduated from the medical
    department of Harvard in 1847. In 1850 he went to Fall River and
    began the practice of his profession, winning a high rank as a
    skillful physician. When a young man he was active in the
    anti-slavery movement and in 1851 made a speech in favor of
    instructing the local representatives to vote for Charles Sumner for
    United States senator. He was a member of the state constitutional
    convention in 1853, and in 1858 and 1861 was a state senator. He was
    a member of the national Republican convention which nominated
    Abraham Lincoln in 1860, and also in 1876 when Rutherford B. Hayes
    was nominated. At the request of Governor Andrew of Massachusetts,
    he introduced the resolution for the appointment of peace
    commissioners to attend a convention in Washington in an endeavor to
    preserve peace between the North and the South. During the early
    days of the Civil War he assisted in the formation of the Seventh
    Massachusetts Regiment, intending to accompany them to the front as
    surgeon, but gave way to a relative of the colonel of the regiment,
    who was desirous of securing the appointment. He was later appointed
    by Governor Andrew medical examiner of recruits for his district,
    and later examiner of applicants for exemption from military duty on
    account of physical disability. He was one of the three local
    surgeons who, in obedience to a call from Washington, after the
    second battle of Bull Run, went to Alexandria and assisted in
    treating the wounded. In 1863 Governor Andrew appointed him a member
    of the State Board of Charities, and in 1869 he was appointed a
    member of the State Board of Health by Governor Claflin, and when
    the two boards were consolidated he was appointed as a member of the
    new board by Governor Talbot. In 1873 he was elected mayor of Fall
    River without opposition, and at the close of his term he donated
    his salary to the Children’s Home. He was elected to Congress in
    1882 and re-elected in 1884 and 1886 and was afterwards appointed by
    Gov. Oliver Ames a member of the Metropolitan Sewerage Commission.
    Doctor Davis in his long life had been prominent and successful in
    so many different fields that his early life as a physician and
    politician had been in a sense forgotten by the present generation.
    During the Land League and other Irish movements, Doctor Davis was
    always generous in support of Home Rule principles, and he had
    frequently been heard making eloquent and appealing pleas for the
    freedom of his native land. He was identified with the business
    interests of Fall River as a large owner of real estate and as one
    of the largest holders of mill stock in the city. He held large
    blocks of stock in a number of the mills, preferring to invest so as
    to be a dominant factor in the corporation in which he was
    interested. Doctor Davis held many offices in the corporations of
    the city. He was a director and also president of the Algonquin
    Printing Company, the Stafford mills and the Wampanoag mills. He was
    also a director in the Davis mills, the Merchants’ mills and the
    Stevens Manufacturing Company. He had been president of the Fall
    River board of trade, the Union Hospital Corporation and the Home
    Market Club. Doctor Davis married, in 1848, Sarah Congdon Wilbur,
    daughter of Dr. Thomas Wilbur of Fall River, who died in 1856, and
    in 1862 he married Susan A. Haight, daughter of Moses Haight of
    Westchester County, New York, who passed away a few years ago. He is
    survived by one son, Robert C. Davis of the law firm of Jackson,
    Slade & Borden.

  DOOGUE, WILLIAM, born in Queen’s County, Ireland, 1828; died in
    Dorchester (Boston), Mass., November 2, 1906; superintendent of
    public grounds, Boston, Mass. When a lad his family emigrated,
    settling in Middletown, Conn. Here Mr. Doogue was educated in the
    local schools, having in his native country received primary
    instruction at a private school. At the age of seventeen he was
    apprenticed to Affleck, Whitmore & Co., of Hartford, Conn., who
    operated one of the most extensive nursery and greenhouse plants in
    New England at the time. Here he learned the science of
    floriculture, horticulture and landscape gardening. He served five
    years with this firm, and during the last three years of his
    apprenticeship studied botany under the tuition of Professor
    Comstock of Trinity College, a well-known writer on that subject.
    After the death of Mr. Affleck, Mr. Doogue became a partner in the
    firm, the style of which was changed to that of Whitmore & Co. In
    1865 Mr. Doogue dissolved his connection with the firm and came to
    Boston. He assumed the entire management of the floricultural and
    horticultural business of Charles Copeland in Boston and Melrose,
    Mass. Later he established himself in business as a florist and was
    most successful. In 1871 Mr. Doogue’s skill was fittingly recognized
    when he was chosen to lay out the grounds of the Centennial
    Exposition held in Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, and make a tropical
    and sub-tropical display. He did splendid work and was highly
    complimented, and as a reward was presented with two gold and two
    silver medals and diplomas. Mr. Doogue transformed the Boston Public
    Garden from a place of a few monotonous floral displays during the
    summer season, to one of a succession of brilliant, attractive and
    artistic flowering and rare plants and exotics, which have been the
    delight of visitors. He propagated many of the most rare and costly
    plants and bulbs, and accumulated stocks of these and other products
    of the greenhouse and nursery, which are today worth in money much
    more than the whole plant has cost the city. It may be said he
    created the department of public grounds, for when he took charge of
    it it was only a name, a title; now it is a substantial and
    creditable asset of the city, as well as a fitting monument to the
    genius and memory of William Doogue. Mr. Doogue was liberal, but
    unostentatious in his contributions to works of religion and
    charity. His aid to the Home for Destitute Catholic Children and St.
    Mary’s Infant Asylum, Dorchester, is remembered with gratitude by
    the Sisters having charge of those institutions. He leaves five
    children, Mrs. Timothy McCarthy, Mrs. D. H. Sullivan, Mrs. John
    O’Connell and Luke J. and William J. Doogue. The funeral of Mr.
    Doogue took place from the Church of the Immaculate Conception,
    Boston, in which for years he had been a faithful worshipper. In the
    congregation were Mayor Fitzgerald, ex-Mayor T. N. Hart, city
    officials and representatives of organizations of which Mr. Doogue
    was a member. Interment was at Middletown, Conn.

  KENEDY, P. J., born in New York City, 1843; died there January 4,
    1906. He was educated at the Christian Brothers’ School in Canal
    Street, New York. Being brought up in the book business, he assisted
    his father in his stores in Centre Street and in Mott Street and
    Barclay Street. On his father’s death, Mr. Kenedy succeeded to the
    business, and so well did it develop that he soon took over the
    entire building at No. 5 Barclay Street, which in time became the
    most extensive Catholic publishing house in the country. A few years
    ago he took two of his sons into the firm with him, and they will
    continue the business, the foundation of which their grandfather,
    John Kenedy, laid eighty years ago. In the fall of 1895, Pope Leo
    XIII made Mr. Kenedy a publisher to the Holy See, in New York. He
    leaves a widow, three sons and four daughters.

  MOORE, COL. O’BRIEN, born in Ireland; died in Tucson, Ariz., August
    26, 1906. A life member of the Society. At the time of his death he
    was general manager of the Citizen Printing and Publishing Co.,
    Tucson, controlling a valuable newspaper plant and issuing a daily
    and weekly. He was a man of great brilliancy. On the breaking out of
    the war with Spain, he entered the service as lieutenant-colonel of
    the Second West Virginia Infantry. After a year’s service, and peace
    being declared with Spain, he became lieutenant-colonel of United
    States Volunteers for the operations in the Philippines, where he
    served for eighteen months, until his regiment was mustered out. He
    then settled in Tucson. He was a newspaper man of much ability and
    experience. Some of his early newspaper career was spent in Houston,
    Tex., on the _Post_, of which journal he became managing editor. He
    was later managing editor of the St. Louis _Republic_, and was also
    Washington correspondent for that paper at Washington, D. C.

  MCCALL, JOHN A., born in Albany, N. Y., 1849; died at Lakewood, N. J.,
    February 18, 1906. He became clerk in the Albany State Currency
    Assorting House; was later in the service of the Connecticut Mutual
    Life Insurance Co. until 1869; served in the New York state
    insurance department as clerk, 1869–’76; was deputy superintendent,
    1876–’83; superintendent of insurance of New York, 1883–’86;
    comptroller Equitable Life Assurance Society, 1887–’92, and was
    later president of the New York Life Insurance Co. He was a life
    member of the Society.

  O’FLYNN, REV. DENIS P., born in County Cork, Ireland, 1847; died in
    New York City, August 22, 1906. He was educated at St. Colman’s
    College, Fermoy, and then spent two years in study in Paris. He
    entered Louvain University, Belgium, and obtained the degree of
    doctor of theology. Returning to Paris, he was ordained to the
    priesthood and then came to America. He was eventually made vicar
    apostolic to the Bahamas. He became rector of St. Mary’s Church,
    Saugerties, N. Y., and for fifteen years, up to the time of his
    death, was rector of St. Joseph’s Church, New York City.

  QUINLAN, COL. JAMES, born in Ireland, 1843; died in New York City,
    August 29, 1906. He came to this country when he was but seventeen
    years of age. He became a first lieutenant in the Sixty-ninth New
    York Regiment, and, in 1861, went with it to Washington, D. C. He
    was mustered out the following year, and joined the Eighty-eighth
    New York Volunteers, which was part of Meagher’s famous Irish
    Brigade. For conspicuous bravery at Savage Station, in June, 1862,
    Colonel Quinlan subsequently received the United States medal of
    honor.

  SULLIVAN, PATRICK F., born in County Kerry, Ireland; died in Boston,
    Mass., July 18, 1906. He came to Boston, Mass., when he was about
    sixteen years of age. Obtaining employment in a clothing store at
    the North End, his first venture in life’s struggle was made. Later
    he took a position with the house of Leonard & Co., brokers in
    furniture and auctioneers. Succeeding years found him connected with
    Libbie, dealer in rare books, and he continued in this business
    under the title of Sullivan Bros. & Libbie until the early eighties,
    when he took premises in School Street, Boston, under the name
    Sullivan & McDonald, and later Sullivan Brothers, auctioneers. As
    one of the principal assessors of the City of Boston, he established
    a reputation for skill and judgment which caused his opinion to be
    sought and followed without hesitation. His generous, charitable
    nature and his devotion to religion, as well as his broad, practical
    mind, is shown in the following disposition of his fortune in public
    benefactions. By the first clause of the will, the testator gives to
    his sister, Catherine A. Sullivan, $30,000 as a preferred legacy,
    and then the following bequests are made: To the Catholic University
    of America, $5,000; to the trustees of Boston College in Boston,
    $5,000; to St. John’s Ecclesiastical Seminary, Brighton, $5,000; to
    the trustees of the Boston Public Library, to be expended for the
    purchase of Catholic standard books, approved by the archbishop of
    Boston, or by the president of Boston College, $5,000; to the Little
    Sisters of the Poor on Dudley Street, Roxbury, Mass., $5,000; to the
    House of the Good Shepherd, Boston, $5,000; Carney Hospital, in
    memory of Thomas F. Sullivan, deceased brother of the testator,
    $5,000; to St. Mary’s Infant Asylum and lying-in hospital,
    Dorchester, $5,000; to the Free Home for Consumptives, Quincy
    Street, Dorchester, $5,000; Society for Propagation of the Faith,
    $3,500; to particular council of St. Vincent de Paul Society, to be
    distributed among the various conferences of the archdiocese of
    Boston, $2,500; to Home for Destitute Catholic Children, Boston,
    $2,500; Holy Ghost Hospital for Incurables, Cambridge, $2,500; to
    the reverend superior of the Paulist Fathers of the City of New
    York, for missions to non-Catholics, $1,500; to superior of Rocky
    Mountain Mission of Society of Jesus, to aid in carrying on
    religious missions among the Indians, $1,500; to Cardinal Gibbons,
    to aid in carrying on religious missions among colored people of
    this country, $1,500; to the Conference of St. Vincent de Paul
    connected with Church of All Saints, Center Street, Boston, $500; to
    the pastor of All Saints’ Church of Center Street, to aid in paying
    off the debt on said church, $1,500; to Conference of St. Vincent de
    Paul connected with Cathedral of Holy Cross in Boston, $500; to the
    St. Vincent Orphan Asylum, Camden Street, Boston, $2,000; to the
    Working Boys’ Home, Boston, $2,000; to House of Angel Guardian on
    Vernon Street, Boston, $2,000; to Trinity College, Washington, D.
    C., $1,500; to Church of the Immaculate Conception, on Harrison
    Avenue, $500; to Church of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, Boston, $500;
    to Cathedral of Holy Cross, Boston, $500; to Church of St. Mary of
    the Sacred Heart on Endicott Street, Boston, $500. Five thousand
    dollars is distributed among certain nieces of the deceased, and the
    rest and residue of the property is given to the sister of the
    testator, Catherine A. Sullivan.

  TRAVERS, AMBROSE F., born in New York City, September 8, 1851; died in
    New York, January 29, 1906. He was of the firm Travers Brothers
    Company, cordage manufacturers, and was a brother of the late
    Francis C. Travers of New York. The latter was also a member of the
    Society and very active in advancing its interests. Vincent P.
    Travers, another brother, is likewise a member of the organization.




       MEMBERSHIP ROLL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

            [For officers of the Society see pages 5 and 6.]


  =Adams, Hon. Samuel=, president and treasurer of the O’Neill-Adams
    Co., 20th to 22d Street, Sixth Avenue, New York City; director,
    Garfield National Bank; member of the New York Chamber of Commerce;
    trustee, Excelsior Savings Bank; an ex-state senator of Colorado.

  =Adams, T. Albeus=, president, Manhattan Refrigerating Co., 525 West
    Street, New York City; president, Adams & Co., New York; president,
    Union Terminal Cold Storage Co., Jersey City, N. J.

  =Ahern, John=, 5 Highland Street, Concord, N. H.

  =Aspell, John= (M. D.), 139 West 77th Street, New York City; member of
    the Academy of Medicine; of the County Medical Association, and of
    the Celtic Medical Society; recently president of the latter;
    visiting surgeon to St. Vincent’s Hospital.

  =Bannin, Michael E.=, of Converse, Stanton & Co., dry goods commission
    merchants, 83 and 85 Worth Street, New York City; member of the
    Merchants Association, New York; director, the Emigrant Industrial
    Savings Bank; vice-president, the Catholic Summer School (Cliff
    Haven); member of the Merchants and Catholic clubs, New York, of the
    Montauk Club, Brooklyn, and of the Brooklyn Arts and Science
    Institute; director, the Columbian National Life Insurance Co.;
    director, American Investment Securities Co.; director, Citizen
    Trust Co., Brooklyn.

  =Bannon, Henry G.=, 107 East 55th Street, New York City; president of
    the Irish National Club; secretary, Celtic-American Publishing Co.

  =Barrett, Michael F.=, of Barrett Bros., wholesale and retail dealers
    in teas, coffees, etc., 308 Spring Street and 574 Hudson Street, New
    York City.

  =Barry, Hon. Patrick T.=, 87–97 South Jefferson Street, Chicago, Ill.
    (Life member of the Society); advertising manager, Chicago Newspaper
    Union; director, First National Bank of Englewood, Ill.; director,
    The _Chicago Citizen_ Company; has been a member of the state
    Legislature of Illinois; prominently identified with educational
    interests.

  =Barry, Rev. Michael=, Oswego, N. Y.

  =Baxter, Rev. James J.= (D. D.), 9 Whitmore Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Blake, Michael=, of John Leonard & Co., iron and steel, 149 Broadway,
    New York City.

  =Bodfish, Rev. Joshua P. L.=, Canton, Mass.; formerly chancellor of
    the Roman Catholic archdiocese of Boston; a director of the Bunker
    Hill Monument Association.

  =Bourlet, John W.=, of the Rumford Printing Co., Concord, N. H.

  =Boyle, Hon. Patrick J.=, Newport, R. I.; has been mayor of that city
    many terms.

  =Brady, Rev. Cyrus Townsend= (LL. D.), rector, Trinity P. E. Church,
    Toledo, Ohio; member of the Society of Colonial Wars, of the Sons of
    the Revolution, of the Military Order of Foreign Wars, and of other
    patriotic organizations; chaplain of the First Pennsylvania
    Volunteer Infantry, war with Spain; formerly Protestant Episcopal
    archdeacon of Pennsylvania; author of _For Love of Country_, _For
    the Freedom of the Sea_, _Stephen Decatur_, _Commodore Paul Jones_,
    _Border Fights and Fighters_, _The True Andrew Jackson_, and other
    works.

  =Brady, Owen J.=, with The H. B. Claflin Co., 224 Church Street, New
    York City.

  =Brandon, Edward J.=, city clerk, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Brann, Rev. Henry A.= (D. D.), 141 East 43d Street, New York City
    (Life member of the Society).

  =Brennan, Hon. James F.=, lawyer, Peterborough, N. H.; a trustee of
    the New Hampshire State Library.

  =Brennan, James F.=, contractor, 2 Garden Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Brennan, P. J.=, 788 West End Avenue, New York City.

  =Brett, Frank P.=, town clerk and attorney, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Brierly, Frank=, 268 West 131st Street, New York City.

  =Broderick, William J.=, 52 Morton Street, New York City.

  =Brosnahan, Rev. Timothy=, rector of St. Mary’s Church, Waltham, Mass.

  =Buckley, Andrew=, Parsons, Labette County, Kansas.

  =Burke, Robert E.=, recently city solicitor, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Burr, William P.=, office of the Corporation Council, New York City.

  =Butler, M. J.=, real estate and insurance, Morris Avenue, corner of
    144th Street, New York City.

  =Butler, T. Vincent=, with R. G. Dun & Co., New York City.

  =Buttimer, Thomas H.=, lawyer, Hingham and Boston, Mass.

  =Byrne, Dr. C. E.=, of the C. E. Byrne Piano Co., East 41st Street,
    New York City.

  =Byrne, Joseph M.=, insurance, 800 Broad Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Byrne, Rt. Rev. Mgr. William= (D. D., V. G.), rector of St. Cecilia’s
    Church, St. Cecilia Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Byrnes, Patrick J.=, builder and general contractor, 105 East 31st
    Street, New York City.

  =Cahill, John H.=, lawyer, 15 Dey Street, New York City; prominently
    identified with telephone interests; vice-president, secretary,
    attorney and director of the New York Telephone Co., and the Empire
    City Subway Co. He is also a director of the American District
    Telephone Co.; the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Co.; the Holmes
    Protective Co.; the New England Telephone and Telegraph Co.; the
    Delaware Telegraph and Telephone Co.; Northwestern Telephone and
    Telegraph Co., and the Southwestern Telephone and Telegraph Co.

  =Calnin, James=, 101–107 Lakeview Avenue, Lowell, Mass.

  =Cannon, Thomas H.=, of the law firm Cannon & Poage, Stock Exchange
    Building, Chicago, Ill.

  =Carbray, Hon. Felix=, Benburb Place, Quebec, Canada; member of the
    Royal Irish Academy; Fellow of the Royal Society of Antiquaries,
    Ireland; member of the Quebec Harbor Commission and of the Quebec
    Board of Trade; consul for Portugal at Quebec, and dean of the
    Consular Corps; trustee of St. Patrick’s Church, and of St.
    Bridget’s Asylum; has represented his district in the parliament of
    the Province of Quebec. He was one of the pioneers in the lumber
    trade between the St. Lawrence and South America; has engaged in the
    general commission and shipping business; and has been a member of
    the successive firms: Carbray & Routh; Carbray, Routh & Co.; and
    Carbray, Son & Co.

  =Carmody, T. F.=, lawyer, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Carney, Michael=, of M. Carney & Co., Lawrence, Mass.

  =Carroll, Edward=, Leavenworth National Bank, Leavenworth, Kansas.

  =Carroll, Edward R.=, 333 East 51st Street, New York City; clerk’s
    office, Court of General Sessions of the Peace, City and County of
    New York.

  =Carroll, John L.=, secretary, American Oil & Supply Co., 23 Division
    Place, Newark, N. J.

  =Carter, Patrick=, real estate, mortgages and insurance, 32
    Westminster Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Carter, Hon. Thomas H.=, Helena, Mont.; a United States senator.

  =Casey, Michael=, of Casey & Bacon, wholesale grocers, Pittsfield,
    Mass.

  =Cassidy, John J.=, 907 Adams Street, Wilmington, Del.

  =Cassidy, Patrick= (M. D.), Norwich, Conn.; was surgeon-general on the
    staff of Gov. Luzon B. Morris of Connecticut, ranking as
    brigadier-general.

  =Chittick, Rev. J. J.=, Hyde Park, Mass.

  =Clancy, Laurence=, dry goods merchant, West Bridge Street, Oswego, N.
    Y.; president of L. Clancy, Sons & Co.; trustee, Oswego County
    Savings Bank; director, electric street railway; member, Normal
    school board; has repeatedly declined a nomination for mayor of
    Oswego.

  =Clare, William F.=, lawyer, 71 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Clark, Rev. James F.=, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Clarke, James=, of James Clarke & Co., booksellers and publishers, 3,
    5 and 7 West 22d Street, New York City.

  =Clarke, Joseph I. C.=, Sunday editor, New York _Herald_, Herald
    Square, New York City; residence, 159 West 95th Street.

  =Clary, Charles H.=, Hallowell, Me.; a descendant of John Clary, “of
    Newcastle, province of New Hampshire,” who married Jane Mahoney, of
    Georgetown, Me., 1750. Four children were born to them before 1760.
    Mr. Clary of Hallowell, Me., here mentioned, was one of the founders
    of the Clary Reunion Family which meets annually.

  =Cockran, Hon. W. Bourke=, 31 Nassau Street, New York City; a member
    of Congress. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Coffey, Rev. Michael J.=, East Cambridge, Mass.

  =Coghlan, Rev. Gerald P.=, 2141 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Cohalan, Daniel F.=, lawyer, 271 Broadway, New York City.

  =Coleman, John=, capitalist, Louisville, Ky.

  =Collins, James M.=, 6 Sexton Avenue, Concord, N. H.

  =Collins, Hon. John S.=, Gilsum, N. H.; manufacturer of woolens; an
    ex-state senator of New Hampshire.

  =Conaty, Bernard=, 30 Cypress Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Conaty, Rev. B. S.=, 340 Cambridge Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Conaty, Rt. Rev. Thomas J.= (D. D.), Los Angeles, Cal., bishop of the
    Roman Catholic diocese of Monterey and Los Angeles.

  =Condon, Edward O’Meagher=, U. S. Court House and Post-office,
    Nashville, Tenn.; connected with the office of the U. S. Supervising
    Architect, Washington, D. C., as an inspector of public buildings;
    served in the Union army during the Civil War.

  =Coney, Patrick H.=, lawyer, 316 Kansas Avenue, Topeka, Kan. He
    entered the Union army in 1863, at the age of 15 years, enlisting in
    the One Hundred and Eleventh New York Infantry. He was detailed as
    dispatch bearer on General McDougall’s staff, promoted as an orderly
    dispatch bearer on Gen. Nelson A. Miles’ staff, served in this
    capacity on to Appomatox and Lee’s surrender, and was transferred
    June 5, 1865, to Company H, Fourth New York Heavy Artillery. He
    served until October 5, 1865, when he was honorably discharged at
    Hart’s Island, N. Y. He was wounded at the battle of Peach Orchard
    in front of Petersburg, Va., on June 16, 1864, and rejoined his
    command from the hospital after sixty days’ convalescence. In
    addition to his law practice, he is president and manager of the
    National Investment and Development Co., which is engaged in the
    promotion and development of 11,000 acres of mineral, gas and oil
    lands in Benton County, Mo.

  =Conlon, William L.=, Portsmouth, N. H.

  =Connery, William P.=, Wheeler and Pleasant Streets, Lynn, Mass.;
    recently candidate for mayor of Lynn.

  =Connolly, Capt. James=, real estate, Coronado, Cal. He was born in
    County Cavan, Ireland, 1842; came to this country when he was but
    ten years of age, and spent much of his youth at East Dennis, Cape
    Cod, Mass. His early love for the sea was gratified later in life
    when he became captain of some of the finest deep-water ships
    sailing from Baltimore, Boston and elsewhere. His first command was
    the bark _May Queen_, a regular Baltimore and Rio packet, 1872. He
    then had command of the ship Pilgrim of Boston, and made several
    voyages to the East Indies. In 1884 he was given command of the
    _Charger_, a larger and finer ship than the _Pilgrim_, and sailed to
    ports in Japan. He next had command of the _South American_, “the
    Commodore’s ship,” of the Hastings fleet (Boston), and took her to
    Australia and other parts. He made several record voyages during his
    career, and some of these records still stand, having never been
    equalled. On one occasion he was wrecked off the coast of Africa; he
    and his wife upon being rescued were hospitably entertained by the
    Boers of the adjacent country. Returning to East Dennis, Mass., his
    wife’s health became poor and so he removed with her to Coronado,
    Cal., hoping that the change of climate would benefit her, but she
    died in 1901. She had accompanied her husband on several of his
    voyages, and had with him visited many parts of the world. Captain
    Connolly has written much and entertainingly. He has at present in
    manuscript form a novel of ocean life entitled _The Magic of the
    Sea_.

  =Connolly, Rev. Arthur T.=, Center and Creighton Streets, Roxbury
    (Boston), Mass.

  =Connor, Michael=, 509 Beech Street, Manchester, N. H.

  =Conway, James L.=, 113 Worth Street, New York City.

  =Cooke, Rev. Michael J.=, Fall River, Mass. (Life member of the
    Society.)

  =Cooney, Brig.-Gen. Michael= (U. S. A.), retired, 500 T Street, N. W.,
    Washington, D. C.; born in Ireland; private, corporal and sergeant,
    Company A, First United States Cavalry, December 4, 1856, to
    December 4, 1861; quartermaster-sergeant, Sixth Cavalry, December,
    1864; first lieutenant, Ninth Cavalry, July 28, 1866; captain,
    January 1, 1868; major, Fourth Cavalry, December 10, 1888;
    lieutenant-colonel, Seventh Cavalry, June 2, 1897; colonel, Fourth
    Cavalry, June 9, 1899; brigadier-general, retired, April 23, 1904.

  =Coughlin, John=, 177 Water Street, Augusta, Me.

  =Cox, Hugh M.= (M. D.), 285 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York City.

  =Cox, Michael F.= (M. D., M. R. I. A.), 26 Merrion Square, Dublin,
    Ireland.

  =Cox, Michael H.=, 54 Commerce Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Cox, William T.=, 12 South Second Street, Elizabeth, N. J., owner of
    Cox’s Towing Line; for some years chairman of the fire commissioners
    of Elizabeth; ex-chief of the Elizabeth Volunteer Fire Department.

  =Coyle, Rev. James=, Taunton, Mass.

  =Coyle, Rev. John D.=, 79 Davenport Avenue, New Haven, Conn.

  =Crane, Maj. John=, 8 & 10 Bridge Street, New York City; of the firm
    Crane & MacMahon, manufacturers of wheels, carriage woodstock, and
    hardwood lumber. Among offices held by him may be mentioned:
    director of the Ganesvoort Bank, New York; trustee of Emigrant
    Industrial Savings Bank; president of the Irish Emigrant Society;
    president of Ascension Conference, Society of St. Vincent de Paul;
    member of the Superior Council, Society of St. Vincent de Paul;
    chairman of the Finance Committee for Special Work, of the same
    society; vice-president of the Virginia and North Carolina Wheel
    Co., Richmond, Va.; vice-president of the St. Marys Spoke and Wheel
    Co., of St. Marys, Ohio; trustee of the Soldiers and Sailors Home,
    Bath, N. Y.; vice-president of the Society of the Army of the
    Tennessee. He is also a member of the New York Commandery, Military
    Order of the Loyal Legion, of the New York Friendly Sons of St.
    Patrick, and of other organizations. He was a commissioned officer
    during the Civil War in the Sixth and Seventeenth Wisconsin
    regiments of Infantry, saw four years of very active service, and
    was regimental and brigade adjutant for a considerable period.

  =Creagh, Rev. John T.= (J. U. L., S. T. L., J. C. D.), Catholic
    University, Washington, D. C.; associate professor of canon law.

  =Creamer, Walter H.=, 4 Prescott Place, Lynn, Mass. His
    great-grandfather, Edward Creamer, was born in Kinsale, Ireland,
    1756, was graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1784
    settled in Salem, Mass. He was a physician there. This Edward had a
    son George who married Hannah Gardner whose mother was Mary
    Sullivan, a sister of Gen. John Sullivan of the Revolution and of
    Gov. James Sullivan of Massachusetts. Walter H. Creamer, here
    mentioned, is a grandson of the said George and Hannah (Gardner)
    Creamer.

  =Crimmins, Cyril=, of the Crimmins Realty Co., 624 Madison Avenue, New
    York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Crimmins, Hon. John D.=, 40 East 68th Street, New York City; a Life
    member of the Society; president-general of the organization in
    1901, 1902 and 1905. Mr. Crimmins served as a park commissioner of
    New York City from 1883 to 1888, during which time he was treasurer
    and president of the board. He was a member of the Board of Visitors
    to West Point in 1894, and presidential elector (Democratic) in 1892
    and 1904. He was appointed by Governor Roosevelt and served as a
    member of the Greater New York Charter Revision Commission. In 1894,
    he was a member of the New York State Constitutional Convention. Mr.
    Crimmins is a member of the New York Chamber of Commerce and is
    officially connected with many railway, realty and banking
    corporations. He is president of the Essex and Hudson Land
    Improvement Co.; honorary vice-president of the Trust Company of
    America, New York; vice-president of the Title Insurance Co. of New
    York; vice-president of the New York Mortgage and Security Co.;
    director of the Fifth Avenue Bank of New York, and also a director
    in the following companies: the Century Realty Co. and the Chelsea
    Realty Co. He is prominently identified with the charities of the
    Roman Catholic Church, as well as with non-sectarian charities. He
    is a member of the board of managers of the Society for the
    Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; member of the executive committee
    of the New York State Branch of the American National Red Cross
    Society; member of the board of directors of the Pennsylvania, New
    York and Long Island Railroad Co.; member of the board of directors
    of the Metropolitan Bank; member of the board of managers of St.
    Vincent’s Hospital; member of the board of trustees of St. John’s
    Guild, and also of the Provident Loan Society of New York. Mr.
    Crimmins is also a director of the City and Suburban Homes Co. of
    New York, which has for its object to provide model homes at
    reasonable cost for working people. He is a member of the following
    clubs: Catholic, Metropolitan, Lawyers, Democratic, Manhattan, and
    of the Wee Burn Golf Club, of which he was formerly president. He is
    likewise a member of the board of managers of the Sevilla Home for
    Children, a non-sectarian charity, and is also one of the managers
    of the Society for the Reformation of Juvenile Delinquents.

  =Crimmins, Capt. Martin L.=, U. S. A.; care of War Department,
    Washington, D. C.; a son of Hon. John D. Crimmins of New York City.

  =Cronin, Capt. William=, Rutland, Vt.

  =Croston, J. F.= (M. D.), 83 Emerson Street, Haverhill, Mass.

  =Cummings, Matthew J.=, overseer of the poor, 616 Eddy Street,
    Providence, R. I.

  =Cummins, Rev. John F.=, Roslindale (Boston), Mass.

  =Cunningham, James=, 277 Congress Street, Portland, Me.

  =Curran, Philip A.=, of the Curran Dry Goods Co., Waterbury, Conn.

  =Curry, Edmond J.=, 69–71 East 89th Street, New York City.

  =Daly, John J.=, 1045 Longwood Avenue, Bronx, New York City; foreman,
    U. S. Immigration buildings, Ellis Island.

  =Daly, Hon. Joseph F.= (LL. D.), Wall Street, New York City; chief
    justice of the Court of Common Pleas, New York, 1890–’96; justice of
    the New York Supreme Court, 1896–’98; member of the Board of
    Managers, Roman Catholic Orphan Asylum; member of the Advisory
    Board, St. Vincent’s Hospital; served in 1900 on the commission to
    revise the laws of Porto Rico.

  =Danaher, Hon. Franklin M.=, Albany, N. Y.; member of the State Board
    of Law Examiners; many years judge of the City Court of Albany.

  =Danvers, Robert E.=, 349–351 West 58th Street (the St. Albans), New
    York City; dealer in iron and steel.

  =Dasey, Charles V.=, Board of Trade Building, Broad Street, Boston,
    Mass.; steamship and insurance agent; general Eastern agent, Anchor
    Line S. S. Co., and of the Italian Royal Mail S. S. Co.; general
    agent, Insular Navigation Co.; general agency for ocean travel.

  =Davis, John H.=, assistant cashier, Seaboard National Bank, New York
    City.

  =Day, Joseph P.=, real estate, 932 Eighth Avenue, New York City.

  =Deeves, Richard=, of Richard Deeves & Son, builders, 305–309
    Broadway, New York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Delahanty, Dr. W. J.=, Trumbull Square, Worcester, Mass.

  =Delehanty, Hon. F. B.=, Judges’ Chambers, Court House, City Hall
    Park, New York; a judge of the City Court.

  =Dempsey, George C.=, Lowell, Mass.

  =Dempsey, William P.=, treasurer and manager, the Dempsey Bleachery
    and Dye Works, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =DeRoo, Rev. Peter=, St. Joseph’s Church, 45 Fifteenth Street, North,
    Portland, Ore.; author of the _History of America Before Columbus_,
    a most interesting and valuable work.

  =Devlin, James H.=, 35 Parsons Street, Brighton (Boston), Mass.

  =Devlin, James H., Jr.=, lawyer, Barristers Hall, Pemberton Square,
    Boston, Mass.

  =Dixon, Richard=, insurance, 52–54 William Street, New York City.

  =Donahue, Dan A.=, 178 Essex Street, Salem, Mass.

  =Donahue, R. J.=, cashier of the National Bank of Ogdensburg, N. Y.

  =Donnelly, Thomas F.=, lawyer, 257 Broadway, New York City.

  =Donoghue, D. F.= (M. D.), 240 Maple Street, Holyoke, Mass.

  =Donovan, Daniel=, 21 High Rock Street, Lynn, Mass.; an authority on
    heraldry, armorial bearings, etc.; particularly as the same relate
    to Ireland.

  =Donovan, Henry F.=, editor and proprietor _The Chicago
    Eagle_, Teutonic Building, Chicago, Ill.; late colonel and
    inspector-general, Illinois National Guard.

  =Donovan, John W.=, real estate, mortgages and insurance, 360 West
    125th Street, New York City.

  =Donovan, Dr. S. E.=, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Donovan, Col. William H.=, Lawrence, Mass.; commander of the Ninth
    Regiment, M. V. M.; served with the regiment in Cuba during the
    recent war with Spain.

  =Dooley, Michael F.=, of the Union Trust Co., Providence, R. I.

  =Doran, Patrick L.=, Salt Lake City, Utah.

  =Dowd, Willis B.=, lawyer, 141 Broadway, New York City; great-grandson
    of Cornelius Dowd who came to this country about 1750 and settled in
    Moore County, N. C., where he became prominent. The family has
    attained much distinction in North Carolina.

  =Dowling, Rev. Austin=, rector of the Cathedral, Providence, R. I.

  =Downing, Bernard=, secretary to the president of the Borough of
    Manhattan, City Hall, New York City.

  =Downing, D. P.=, with National Biscuit Company, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Doyle, Alfred L.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, real estate agents,
    brokers and appraisers, 45 William Street, New York City.

  =Doyle, James=, 50 Front Street, New York City; present oldest member
    of the flour trade in New York; member of the New York Produce
    Exchange from the beginning; member of the board of managers of the
    Exchange, 1897–1901. He and his son, Nathaniel, are associated in
    trade as James Doyle & Company.

  =Doyle, John F.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, 45 William Street, New York
    City. (Life member of the Society.) Mr. Doyle is the senior member
    of the real estate firm of John F. Doyle & Sons. He was born in New
    York City, 1837, a son of James Doyle who participated in the Irish
    revolution of 1798 and who came to the United States early in 1806.
    This James Doyle, the immigrant, had a son who was killed in the
    Florida war of 1837, and a grandson who fell in 1861, fighting for
    the Union. John F. Doyle, the subject of this sketch and member of
    the Society, entered the law office of Alexander Hamilton, grandson
    of the first secretary of the treasury, afterwards the firm of
    Hamilton, Rives & Rogers, and remained with them from 1853 to 1869,
    in the meantime studying law and being admitted to the bar in 1862.
    Alexander Hamilton, Francis R. Rives, a son of William C. Rives, of
    Virginia, at one time minister to France and senator, and Nathaniel
    Pendleton Rogers, all of the old Revolutionary stock, were members
    of the firm. Mr. Doyle’s management of some Wall Street properties
    for them at this period became so conspicuous that he was urged by
    them to assume the management of their estates, which he did.
    Shortly afterwards followed the acquisition of the estates of such
    well-known people as Mrs. Harriet L. Langdon, granddaughter-in-law
    of the first John Jacob Astor, John Pyne March, Mrs. Morgan L.
    Livingston, George L. Schuyler, James M. Pendleton, A. Newbold
    Morris, James H. Jones, John Steward, Jr., Royal Phelps, deceased,
    Royal Phelps Carroll, Robert S. Minturn, estate of Gertrude L.
    Lowndes, deceased, William H. King, of Newport, R. I., and others
    too numerous to mention in detail. A feature of his career as a
    successful manager lies in the fact that the business associations
    and connections formed by him in the beginning are still held
    intact. Among the notable sales made by him are those from William
    H. Morris to John Jacob Astor in 1880, conveying 150 acres of lots
    in the twenty-third ward on and adjacent to Harlem River; the great
    sale of South Brooklyn lots at Gowanus Bay in 1884. Mr. Doyle
    represents today the same old and well-known families and estates
    represented by him fifty-four years ago. During his career Mr. Doyle
    has met and done business with some of the most notable men
    connected with the families notable in American History, such as
    three of the four sons of the first Alexander Hamilton, Admiral
    Farragut, Capt. Percival Drayton, Rawlins Lowndes, of South
    Carolina, William C. Rives, U. S. senator from Virginia, at one time
    minister to France, George L. Schuyler, grandson of Philip Schuyler
    and owner of the famous yacht _America_, Philip Schuyler, his son,
    Henry Grinnell of Arctic fame, Robert J. and Mortimer Livingston,
    Hon. John Lee Carroll, Commodore Wm. K. Vanderbilt, and scores of
    others equally well known, besides representing branches now of four
    lineal descendants of signers of the Declaration of Independence.
    His two sons, Col. John F. Doyle, Jr., and Alfred L. Doyle, have
    been with him in business for years past and all three enjoy an
    enviable reputation for integrity, ability and prudence in all their
    undertakings.

  =Doyle, Col. John F., Jr.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, 45 William
    Street, New York City.

  =Doyle, Nathaniel=, of James Doyle & Co., flour, etc.; 50 Front
    Street, New York City; member of the board of managers, New York
    Produce Exchange; member of the New York Club, 5th Avenue and 35th
    Street; member, Veteran Association, Seventh Regiment, N. G. S. N.
    Y.

  =Drummond, M. J.=, of M. J. Drummond & Co., 182 Broadway, New York
    City.

  =Duffy, P. P.=, Parsons, Labette County, Kansas.

  =Dunne, F. L.=, 328 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Dwyer, J. R.=, 732 Alpine St., Los Angeles, Cal.

  =Dyer, William H.= (M. D.), Dover, N. H.

  =Editor of “The Rosary Magazine,”= Somerset, O. (Life member of the
    Society.)

  =Egan, James T.=, of the law firm, Gorman, Egan & Gorman, Banigan
    Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Egan, Rev. M. H.=, rector, Church of the Sacred Heart, Lebanon, N. H.

  =Egan, Hon. Patrick=, 18 Broadway, New York City; recently United
    States Minister to Chili.

  =Ellard, George W.=, 180 Lisbon Street, Lewiston, Me.

  =Elliott, Dr. George W.=, Immigration Office, Ellis Island, N. Y. He
    is the duly accredited representative of the Canadian Government at
    the port of New York, co-operating with the public health and marine
    hospital service of the United States in connection with the medical
    examination of aliens passing through the United States immigration
    station, Ellis Island, destined for all points in the Dominion of
    Canada. Doctor Elliott is a native of Ireland.

  =Emmet, J. Duncan= (M. D.), 103 Madison Avenue, New York City.

  =Emmet, Robert=, The Priory, Warwick, England.

  =Emmet, Thomas Addis= (M. D., LL. D.), 89 Madison Avenue, New York
    City (Life member of the Society); grand nephew of the Irish
    patriot, Robert Emmet.

  =Eustace, Hon. Alexander C.=, of the law firm A. C. & J. P. Eustace,
    334 East Water Street, Elmira, N. Y.; during many years past
    identified as attorney or counsel, with many of the most important
    litigations before the courts in southern and western New York; was
    for three years, prior to 1893, president of the New York State
    Civil Service Commission.

  =Fallon, Hon. Joseph D.= (LL. D.), 789 Broadway, South Boston, Mass.;
    justice of the South Boston Municipal Court; vice-president, Union
    Institution for Savings.

  =Fallon, Hon. Joseph P.=, 1900 Lexington Avenue, New York City;
    justice of the Ninth District Municipal Court.

  =Farley, Most Rev. John M.= (D. D.), 452 Madison Ave., New York City.

  =Farrell, James P.=, superintendent of the Brooklyn Disciplinary
    Training School, 18th Avenue, between 56th and 58th streets,
    Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Farrell, John F.=, Brander-Walsh Co., 89 Worth Street, New York City.

  =Farrell, John T.= (M. D.), 16 Messer Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Farrelly, Frank T.=, Springfield News Co., Main Street, Springfield,
    Mass.

  =Farrelly, Stephen=, American News Co., New York City. (Life member of
    the Society.)

  =Feeley, William J.=, treasurer of the W. J. Feeley Co., silversmiths
    and manufacturing jewelers, 185 Eddy Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Ferguson, Hugh=, of Hugh Ferguson & Co., George Street, Charleston,
    S. C.

  =Finen, Rev. J. E.=, Tilton, N. H.

  =Finn, Rev. Thomas J.=, Box 242, Port Chester, N. Y.

  =Fitzgerald, Rev. D. W.=, 9 Pleasant Street, Penacook (Concord), N. H.

  =Fitzgerald, Hon. James=, New York City; a justice of the New York
    Supreme Court.

  =Fitzpatrick, Edward=, on the staff of the Louisville (Ky.) _Times_; a
    resident of New Albany, Ind.; member of the committee to select
    books for the New Albany Public Library; was, from 1878 to 1885,
    Indiana correspondent of the Louisville _Courier-Journal_, reporting
    the Legislature two terms, 1883–’85, for that paper, and at the same
    time was assistant to the chief clerk in the House of
    Representatives; was appointed a clerk in the U. S. Q. M. Depot at
    Jeffersonville, Ind., in 1885, but resigned to re-enter the employ
    of the _Courier-Journal_ as political reporter in Louisville; was
    four years on the Louisville _Post_; returned to the
    _Courier-Journal_; was transferred to the _Times_ (the afternoon
    edition of the _Courier-Journal_), and has been on that paper for
    many years past. He is a keen and forceful writer, and is one of the
    ablest men in American journalism.

  =Fitzpatrick, Thomas B.=, senior member of the firm Brown, Durrell &
    Co., importers and manufacturers, 104 Kingston Street, Boston,
    Mass.; Rand-McNally Building, Chicago, Ill., and 11–19 West 19th
    Street, New York City; president of the Union Institution for
    Savings, Boston, and a director in the United States Trust Co. of
    that city.

  =Fitzpatrick, Rev. William H.=, 2221 Dorchester Avenue, Dorchester
    Center, Mass.

  =Flannagan, Andrew J.= (D. D. S.), Main Street, Springfield, Mass.

  =Flannery, Capt. John=, Savannah, Ga.; of the John Flannery Co.,
    cotton factors and commission merchants; was a non-commissioned
    officer of the Irish Jasper Greens in garrison at Fort Pulaski,
    1861; was later lieutenant and captain, C. S. A., serving under Gen.
    Joe Johnston and General Hood; became a partner, in 1865, in the
    cotton firm, L. J. Guilmartin & Co., having a line of steamers from
    Charleston, S. C., to Palatka, Fla.; bought out the business in
    1877; founded the house of John Flannery & Co.; became director and
    president of the Southern Bank of the State of Georgia; is
    ex-president of the Southern Cotton Exchange; captain, 1872–’98, of
    the Jasper Greens.

  =Fogarty, James A.=, 264 Blatchley Avenue, New Haven, Conn., recently
    a police commissioner of New Haven.

  =Fogarty, Jeremiah W.=, Registry of Deeds, Boston, Mass.

  =Fox, John J.=, 1908–1910 Bathgate Avenue, New York City.

  =Foy, Julius L.=, lawyer, Rialto Building, St. Louis, Mo.

  =Gaffney, Hon. T. St. John=, lawyer; member of the French Legion of
    Honor; 41 Riverside Drive, New York City; is now U. S.
    Consul-General, Dresden, Germany.

  =Gallagher, Patrick=, contractor and builder, 11 East 59th Street, New
    York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Gargan, Hon. Thomas J.=, of the law firm, Gargan, Keating & Brackett,
    Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.; life member of the Society, and
    president-general of the same in 1899 and 1900; member of the Boston
    Transit Commission; director of the United States Trust Co.;
    director, the Columbian National Life Insurance Co.

  =Garrigan, Rt. Rev. Philip J.=, (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
    diocese of Sioux City, Iowa.

  =Garrity, P. H.=, 221 Bank Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Garvan, Francis P.=, assistant district attorney, 23 Fifth Avenue,
    New York City.

  =Garvan, Hon. Patrick=, 236 Farmington Avenue, Hartford, Conn.; paper
    and paper stock. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Geoghegan, Charles A.=, 537–539 West Broadway, New York City.

  =Geoghegan, Joseph=, Salt Lake City, Utah (Life member of the
    Society); vice-president of the board of education, Salt Lake City;
    director of the Utah National Bank; director of the Utah Loan and
    Building Association; director of the Butler Liberal Manufacturing
    Co., all three concerns of Salt Lake City; also, director in many
    other corporations. He is general agent in Utah for Swift & Co. of
    Chicago; Borden’s Condensed Milk Co. of New York; the American Can
    Co. of New York, and the Pennsylvania Salt Mfg. Co. of Philadelphia.
    He is broker for the following: the Western Sugar Refining Co. of
    San Francisco, Cal.; the Utah Sugar Co. of Lehi, Utah; the
    Amalgamated Sugar Co. of Ogden, Utah; the Idaho Sugar Co. of Idaho
    Falls, Idaho, and the Fremont County Sugar Co. of Sugar City, Idaho.

  =Geoghegan, Joseph G.=, 20 East 73d Street, New York City. (Life
    member of the Society.)

  =Geoghegan, Walter F.=, 537–539 West Broadway, New York City.

  =Gibbons, John T.=, merchant, corner of Poydras and South Peters
    streets, New Orleans, La.; brother of Cardinal Gibbons. (Life member
    of the Society.)

  =Gillespie, George J.=, of the law firm Gillespie & O’Connor, 56 Pine
    Street, New York City; trustee, Catholic Summer School (Cliff
    Haven); member of the board of managers of the N. Y. Roman Catholic
    Orphan Asylum; vice-president of the Particular Council, Society of
    St. Vincent de Paul, New York City; member of the N. Y. Board of
    Education; recently tax commissioner of the City of New York. (Life
    member of the Society.)

  =Gilman, John E.=, 43 Hawkins Street, Boston, Mass.; has been
    adjutant-general on the staff of the national commander-in-chief,
    Grand Army of the Republic. In August, 1862, Mr. Gilman enlisted in
    Co. E, Twelfth Massachusetts Infantry (Webster Regiment), and
    participated in campaigns under Generals Pope, McClellan, Burnside,
    Hooker and Meade up to the battle of Gettysburg, Pa., where, on July
    2, 1863, his right arm was shot off near the shoulder. Securing his
    discharge from the army on September 28, 1863, he returned to
    Boston. In 1864, he entered the service of the state and served in
    various departments until 1883, when he was made settlement clerk of
    the directors of Public Institutions of Boston. He was appointed
    soldiers’ relief commissioner, April 2, 1901. He has been a comrade
    of Posts 14, 7 and 26, G. A. R., since 1868, being commander of the
    latter post in 1888. He was department inspector of the
    Massachusetts G. A. R. in 1895; junior vice-commander in 1896;
    senior vice-commander in 1897; delegate-at-large in 1898; and
    department commander in 1899.

  =Goff, Hon. John W.=, recorder, New York City.

  =Gorman, Dennis J.=, assessors’ office, City Hall, Boston, Mass.

  =Gorman, John F.=, lawyer, Stephen Girard Building, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Gorman, William=, lawyer, Stephen Girard Building, Philadelphia, Pa.;
    member of the Pennsylvania Bar Association, the Pennsylvania Academy
    of Fine Arts, the American Academy of Social and Political Science;
    the Alumni Association of the University of Pennsylvania, and other
    organizations. He is officially connected with the Commonwealth
    Title Insurance and Trust Co. of Philadelphia. (Life member of the
    Society.)

  =Guilfoil, Francis P.=, lawyer, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Griffin, John F.=, insurance, Skowhegan, Me.

  =Griffin, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Thomas= (D. D.), St. John’s presbytery, 44
    Temple Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Hagan, James H.=, treasurer of the Park Brewing Co., 1100 Elmwood
    Avenue, Providence, R. I.

  =Haggerty, J. Henry=, of the Haggerty Refining Co., oils, 50 South
    Street, New York City.

  =Haigney, John=, 439 58th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Halley, Charles V.=, 1014 East 175th Street, New York City.

  =Hannan, Hon. John=, mayor of Ogdensburg, N. Y.; president of the
    Ogdensburg Coal and Towing Co.

  =Hanrahan, John D.= (M. D.), Rutland, Vt., a native of County
    Limerick, Ireland; was graduated in medicine from the University of
    the City of New York, 1867; in June, 1861, he was, on examination
    (not having graduated), appointed surgeon in the United States Navy,
    and served through the entire Civil War. The vessels on which he
    served did duty mostly on the rivers of Virginia and North Carolina,
    where he served with the army as well as the navy, thereby having
    the benefit and experience of both branches of the service,
    especially in the surgical line. In August, 1863, the vessel on
    which he was serving was captured at the mouth of the Rappahannock
    River and all on board made prisoners. They were taken overland to
    Richmond where they were confined in Libby Prison. At that time the
    Confederates were very short of surgeons and medical supplies, and
    he was asked if he would go over to Belle Island and attend the
    Union prisoners. After consulting his fellow-prisoners he consented,
    and for six weeks he attended the sick and wounded Union prisoners
    faithfully, under very great disadvantages, as the appliances were
    very limited. After that he was paroled. While a prisoner of war he
    was treated with the greatest courtesy and consideration by the
    medical staff and officers of the Confederacy. After the close of
    the war he was settled in New York City, but for nearly forty years
    has been a resident of Rutland, Vt. He was town and city physician
    of Rutland for many years. He was appointed surgeon of the Third
    Vermont Regiment, 1871, by Governor Stewart; was the first president
    of the Rutland County Medical and Surgical Society; has been a
    director and consulting surgeon of the Rutland (Vt.) Hospital;
    consulting surgeon to the Fanny Allen Hospital, Winooski, Vt.; a
    member of the Vermont Sanitary Association, and a member of the
    Vermont Society for the Prevention of Tuberculosis; president of
    Rutland Village two years and trustee eight years; county
    commissioner one year; president, United States pension examining
    board four years under President Cleveland, and president of the
    same board four years under President Harrison. He was postmaster of
    Rutland during the second term of President Cleveland. He has since
    its organization been an active member of the G. A. R.; surgeon of
    Roberts Post, the largest in Vermont; has served three terms as
    medical director of the Department; served on the staffs of three
    commanders-in-chief—Veasy, Palmer and Weissert; a member of
    Commander-in-Chief Stewart’s staff. Doctor Hanrahan is the author of
    several medical papers, has performed many surgical operations, and
    has served through several epidemics of smallpox and diphtheria. He
    was a delegate to the Democratic National conventions of 1884, 1888,
    and chairman of the Vermont delegation to the National Convention of
    1892. Also a delegate to the Democratic National Convention in St.
    Louis, 1904, and to the Ancient Order of Hibernians convention in
    St. Louis, July 19, 1904.

  =Hanlon, Marcus=, P. O. Box 1920, New York City.

  =Harbison, Hon. Alexander=, Hartford, Conn., recently mayor of
    Hartford.

  =Harrington, Rev. J. C.=, rector of St. Joseph’s Church, Lynn, Mass.

  =Harrington, Rev. John M.=, Orono, Me.

  =Harris, Charles N.=, Tryon Row, New York City.

  =Harson, M. Joseph=, Catholic Club, 120 Central Park South, New York
    City.

  =Hayes, John F.= (M. D.), 15 South Elm Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Hayes, Hon. Nicholas J.=, sheriff, County of New York, 299 Broadway,
    New York City.

  =Hayes, Col. Patrick E.=, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =Hayes, Timothy J.=, 688 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Healy, David=, 70 Jane Street, New York City; U. S. Immigration
    service.

  =Healy, John F.=, general superintendent of the Davis Coal and Coke
    Co., Thomas, Tucker County, W. Va.

  =Healy, Richard=, cloaks, suits, furs, etc., 512 Main Street,
    Worcester, Mass.

  =Hennessy, Michael E.=, on the staff of the _Daily Globe_, Boston,
    Mass.; a newspaper man of wide experience and exceptional ability.

  =Henry, Charles T.=, 120 Liberty Street, New York City.

  =Hickey, James G.=, manager of the United States Hotel, Boston, Mass.
    (Life member of the Society.)

  =Hickey, John J.=, plumbing contractor, 8 East 129th Street, New York
    City.

  =Hickey, Rev. William A.=, Clinton, Mass.

  =Higgins, James J.=, 85 Court Street, Elizabeth, N. J.

  =Hoban, Rt. Rev. M. J.= (D. D.), Scranton, Pa., bishop of the Roman
    Catholic diocese of Scranton.

  =Hogan, John W.=, lawyer, 4 Weybosset Street, Providence, R. I.;
    recently a candidate for Congress.

  =Holland, John P.=, 95 Nelson Place, Newark, N. J.; inventor of the
    submarine torpedo boat.

  =Horigan, Cornelius=, 229 and 231 Main Street, Biddeford, Me.; is
    treasurer of the Andrews & Horigan Co.; has been a member of the
    state Legislature of Maine.

  =Howes, Osborne=, secretary and treasurer of the Board of Fire
    Underwriters, 55 Kilby Street, Boston, Mass. He is a descendant of
    David O’Killa (O’Kelly), who settled on Cape Cod as early as 1657,
    and who is mentioned in the old Yarmouth, Mass., records as “the
    Irishman.” The records show that at the close of King Philip’s War,
    O’Killia was assessed his proportionate part toward defraying the
    expenses of that struggle.

  =Hughes, Rev. Christopher=, Fall River, Mass.

  =Hurley, James H.=, Union Trust Co. Building, Providence, R. I.;
    manager of the real estate department, G. L. & H. J. Gross.

  =Hurley, John E.=, 63 Washington Street, Providence, R. I.;
    vice-president and superintendent of the Remington Printing Co.;
    president, in 1904, of the Rhode Island Master Printers’
    Association.

  =Jameson, W. R.=, 1786 Bathgate Avenue, borough of the Bronx, New York
    City.

  =Jenkinson, Richard C.=, 678 High Street, Newark, N. J.; of R. C.
    Jenkinson & Co., manufacturers of metal goods; candidate for mayor
    of Newark in 1901; was president of the Newark Board of Trade in
    1898–’99 and 1900; has been a director in the Newark Gas Co.; was
    president of the New Jersey Commission to the Pan-American
    Exposition, and one of the vice-presidents of the Exposition,
    representing the state of New Jersey by appointment of Governor
    Voorhees.

  =Jennings, Michael J.=, 753 Third Avenue, New York City.

  =Johnson, James G.=, of James G. Johnson & Co., 649, 651, 653 and 655
    Broadway, New York City.

  =Jordan, Michael J.=, lawyer, 42 Court Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Joyce, Bernard J.=, salesman, Board of Trade Building, Boston, Mass.

  =Joyce, John Jay=, 47 Macdougal Street, New York City.

  =Kane, John H.= (M. D.), Lexington, Mass.

  =Keane, Most Rev. John J.= (D. D.), Dubuque, Ia.; archbishop of the
    Roman Catholic archdiocese of Dubuque.

  =Kearney, James=, lawyer, 220 Broadway, New York City.

  =Keating, Patrick M.=, of the law firm Gargan, Keating & Brackett,
    Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =Keenan, John J.=, Public Library, Copley Square, Boston, Mass.

  =Kehoe, John F.=, 26 Broadway, New York City; officially connected
    with many corporations. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Kelly, Eugene=, Templecourt Building, New York City.

  =Kelly, John Forrest= (Ph. D.), Pittsfield, Mass.; born near
    Carrick-on-Suir, Ireland. He was educated in Stevens Institute of
    Technology, Hoboken, N. J., received the degree of B. L. in 1878,
    and that of Ph. D. in 1881. His first occupation was as assistant to
    Thomas A. Edison, in Menlo Park laboratory, his work then
    principally relating to the chemistry of rare earths. Late in 1879
    Mr. Kelly became electrical engineer of the New York branch of the
    Western Electric Company. This was the time when the telephone was
    being generally introduced, and when dynamos were being first
    applied to telegraphic purposes. In the construction and installment
    of instruments for telegraphy and telephones and of such measuring
    instruments as were then known, Mr. Kelly received a thorough
    training. In 1882 he became laboratory assistant to Edward Weston,
    then chief electrician of the United States Electric Lighting
    Company, and, with the exception of a year which he spent in
    connection with the Remingtons, Mr. Kelly continued his association
    with Mr. Weston until July, 1886. Some of the most important work,
    such as the research which ended in the discovery of high resistance
    alloys of very low or even negative temperature co-efficients, were
    substantially carried out by Mr. Kelly under general directions from
    Mr. Weston, whom Mr. Kelly succeeded as chief electrician of the
    United States Electric Lighting Company, which, in 1889, passed to
    the Westinghouse interests; but Mr. Kelly retained his position as
    chief electrician until January, 1892, when he resigned to join
    William Stanley in experimental work. The work done by Mr. Kelly, in
    this connection, gave a great impetus to the alternating current
    business. Mr. Kelly’s inventive work is partially represented by
    eighty patents. The art of building transformers and generators of
    alternating currents was revolutionized, and Mr. Kelly and his
    colleagues were the first to put polyphase motors into actual
    commercial service. That success naturally led to long-distance
    transmission work, and the first long-distance transmission plants
    in California (indeed the first in the world), were undertaken on
    Mr. Kelly’s recommendation and advice. He was the first to make an
    hysteretically stable steel, a matter of vastly more importance than
    the comparatively spectacular transmission work. Mr. Kelly at
    present occupies the position of president of the John F. Kelly
    Engineering Company, president of the Cokel Company and president of
    the Telelectric Company, as well as president of the Conchas River
    Power Company and director of the Southwestern Exploration Company.
    The Cokel Company is organized to exploit the invention of Mr. E. W.
    Cooke, by means of which foodstuffs may be perfectly dehydrated,
    losing on the average ninety per cent. in weight. Foods dehydrated
    by this process, although free from all chemical preservatives, are
    entirely stable, and yet preserve their pristine freshness through
    extremes of temperature, and when served are indistinguishable from
    fresh foods of the ordinary type. The Telelectric Company is
    organized for the manufacture of electric piano players, which are
    either entirely automatic or entirely controllable at will. Mr.
    Kelly was married to Miss Helen Fischer, in New York City, in 1892,
    and they have two children—Eoghan and Domnall. Mr. Kelly is a
    thorough and unswerving Irish Nationalist, and his splendid
    generosity to the cause is well known.

  =Kelly, Michael F.= (M. D.), Fall River, Mass.

  =Kelly, T. P.=, 544 West 22d Street, New York City; of T. P. Kelly &
    Co., manufacturers of black leads, foundry facings, supplies, etc.

  =Kelly, William J.=, 9 Dove Street, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Kelly, William J.=, insurance, Portsmouth, N. H.

  =Kenah, John F.=, city clerk, Elizabeth, N. J.

  =Kennedy, Charles F.=, Brewer, Me.

  =Kennedy, Daniel=, of the Kennedy Valve Manufacturing Co., Coxsackie,
    N. Y.

  =Kenney, James W.=, Park Brewery, Terrace Street, Roxbury (Boston),
    Mass.; vice-president and director, Federal Trust Co., Boston.

  =Kenney, Thomas=, 143 Summer Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Kenney, Thomas F.= (M. D.), Vienna, Austria.

  =Kerby, John E.=, architect, 481 Fifth Avenue, New York City.

  =Kiernan, Patrick=, 265 West 43d Street, New York City.

  =Kilmartin, Thomas J.= (M. D.), Waterbury, Conn.

  =Kilroy, Philip= (M. D.), Springfield, Mass.

  =Kinsela, John F.=, 509 Gorham Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =Kivel, Hon. John=, Dover, N. H.

  =Knights of St. Patrick=, San Francisco, Cal. (Life membership.) Care
    of John Mulhern, 124 Market Street, San Francisco.

  =Lamb, Matthew B.=, 516 Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Lamson, Col. Daniel S.=, Weston, Mass.; Lieutenant-Colonel commanding
    Sixteenth Regiment (Mass.), 1861; A. A. G., Norfolk, 1862; served on
    staff of General Hooker; is a member of the Society of Colonial
    Wars, Sons of the American Revolution, and Military Order of the
    Loyal Legion; one of his ancestors landed at Ipswich, Mass., in
    1632, and received a grant of 350 acres; another ancestor, Samuel,
    of Reading, Mass., participated in King Philip’s War and had a son
    in the expedition of 1711. Another member of the family, Samuel of
    Weston, commanded a company at Concord, Mass., April 19, 1775, and
    was major and colonel of the Third Middlesex Regiment for many
    years, dying in 1795.

  =Lappin, J. J.=, 7 Grant Street, Portland, Me.

  =Lavelle, John=, Inquiry Division, Post Office, Cleveland, O.

  =Lawler, Joseph A.=, 308 West 14th Street, New York City.

  =Lawler, Thomas B.=, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York City; of Ginn &
    Company, publishers; member of the American Oriental Society and of
    the Archæological Society of America.

  =Lawless, Hon. Joseph T.=, lawyer, Norfolk, Va.; recently secretary of
    state, Virginia; now a colonel on the staff of the governor of
    Virginia.

  =Lawlor, P. J.=, 417 East Main Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Lawlor, Thomas F.=, lawyer, 65 Bank Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Leahy, Matthew W.=, 257 Franklin Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Lee, Hon. Thomas Z.=, of the law firm Barney & Lee, Industrial Trust
    Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Lembeck, Gustav W.=, of Lembeck & Betz, Eagle Brewing Co., 173 Ninth
    Street, Jersey City, N. J.

  =Lenehan, John J.=, of the law firm Lenehan & Dowley, 71 Nassau
    Street, New York City. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Lenehan, Rev. B. C.= (V. G.), Fort Dodge, Iowa.

  =Lenihan, Rt. Rev. M. C.=, bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of
    Great Falls, Mont.

  =Lennox, George W.=, manufacturer, Haverhill, Mass.

  =Leonard, Peter F.=, 343 Harvard Street, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Linehan, John J.=, Linehan Corset Co., Worcester, Mass.

  =Linehan, Rev. T. P.=, Biddeford, Me.

  =Lonergan, Thomas S.=, journalist, 658 East 149th Street, New York
    City.

  =Loughlin, Peter J.=, 150 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Lovell, David B.= (M. D.), 32 Pearl Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Luddy, Timothy F.=, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Lyman, William=, 51 East 122d Street, New York City.

  =Lynch, Eugene=, 24 India Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Lynch, J.H.=, Dyker Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Lynch, John E.=, school principal, Worcester, Mass.

  =Lynch, Thomas J.=, lawyer, Augusta, Me.; was city clerk of Augusta,
    1884 and 1885; postmaster of Augusta from 1894 to 1898; and trustee
    of the Public Library; one of the water commissioners; a director of
    the Granite National Bank; trustee of the Kennebec Savings Bank;
    trustee of the Augusta Trust Company; president of the Augusta Loan
    & Building Association; director of the Augusta, Winthrop & Gardiner
    Railway; director of the Augusta Real Estate Association; and
    trustee of many estates.

  =Lynn, John=, 48 Bond Street, New York City.

  =Lynn, Hon. Wauhope=, 257 Broadway, New York City; a judge of one of
    the New York courts.

  =MacDonnell, John T. F.=, paper manufacturer, Holyoke, Mass.

  =MacDwyer, Patrick S.=, 248 East 23d Street, New York City.

  =McAdoo, Hon. William=, recently police commissioner of the City of
    New York; ex-member of Congress; ex-assistant secretary of the navy.

  =McAleenan, Arthur=, 131 West 69th Street, New York City.

  =McAleer, George= (M. D.), Worcester, Mass.

  =McAleevy, John F.=, salesman, 26–50 North Main Street, Pawtucket, R.
    I.

  =McAuliffe, John F.=, engraver, with the Livermore & Knight Co.,
    Westminster Street, Providence, R. I.; born in New York City,
    November 4, 1856; educated in that city; learned the art of bank
    note engraving. His father’s father was a parishioner and intimate
    friend, in Ireland, of Rev. Theobald Mathew.

  =McBride, D. H.=, 10 Barclay Street, New York City.

  =McCaffrey, Hugh=, manufacturer, Fifth and Berks streets,
    Philadelphia, Pa. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McCanna, Francis I.=, lawyer, Industrial Trust Building, Providence,
    R. I.

  =McCarrick, James W.=, general southern agent, Clyde Steamship Co.,
    Norfolk, Va. Mr. McCarrick is a veteran of the Civil War. He was
    transferred, 1861, from Twelfth Virginia Regiment to North Carolina
    gunboat _Winslow_, and appointed master’s mate. Transferred to
    Confederate navy with that steamer, and ordered to Confederate
    steamer _Seabird_, at Norfolk navy yard. Attached to _Seabird_ until
    latter was sunk. Taken prisoner, Elizabeth City, N. C. Paroled
    February, 1862. Exchanged for officer of similar rank captured from
    United States ship _Congress_. Promoted to master and ordered to
    navy yard, Selma, Ala. Served later on Confederate steamships
    _Tuscaloosa_, _Baltic_ and _Tennessee_ at Mobile, and in Mobile Bay,
    and on steamer _Macon_, at Savannah, and on Savannah River. Detailed
    to command water battery at Shell Bluff, below Augusta, after
    surrender of Savannah. Paroled from steamship _Macon_ at Augusta,
    Ga., after Johnson’s surrender. Mr. McCarrick is president of the
    Virginia State Board of Pilot Commissioners; president of the Board
    of Trade of Norfolk, Va.; first vice-president of the Virginia
    Navigation Co.; commissioner representing the state of Virginia in
    the management of the proposed Jamestown Exposition to be held in
    1907; and was president of the Suburban & City Railway and chairman
    of the executive committee of the Norfolk Street Railway until these
    two properties were consolidated and sold to outside parties.

  =McCarthy, Charles, Jr.=, Portland, Me.

  =McCarthy, George W.=, of Dennett & McCarthy, dry goods, Portsmouth,
    N. H.

  =McCarthy, M. R. F.=, 82 Court Street, Binghamton, N. Y.; a
    commissioner of the department of Public Instruction.

  =McCarthy, Patrick J.=, lawyer, Industrial Trust Building, Providence,
    R. I.; has been a member of the General Assembly of Rhode Island.

  =McCaughan, Rev. John P.=, St. Paul’s Church, Warren, Mass.

  =McCaughey, Bernard=, of Bernard McCaughey & Co., house furnishers,
    Pawtucket, R. I.

  =McClean, Rev. Peter H.=, Milford, Conn.

  =McClure, David=, lawyer, 22 William Street, New York City.

  =McConway, William=, of the McConway & Torley Co., Pittsburg, Pa.
    (Life member of the Society.)

  =McCormick, Edward R.=, 15 West 38th Street, New York City.

  =McCoy, Rev. John J.= (LL. D.), rector, St. Ann’s Church, Worcester,
    Mass.

  =McCready, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Charles=, 329 West 42d Street, New York City.

  =McCreery, Robert=, room 427, Produce Exchange, New York City.

  =McCullough, John=, 55 Maxfield Street, New Bedford, Mass.

  =McDonald, Capt. Mitchell C.=, a pay director in the navy; is at
    present stationed at the Naval Home, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =McDonnell, Peter=, 2 Battery Place, New York City; general railroad,
    steamship and banking business; agent, New York, Ontario & Western
    Railway.

  =McDonnell, Robert E.=, lawyer, 38 Park Row, New York City.

  =McDonough, Hon. John J.=, Fall River, Mass.; justice of the second
    district court of Bristol County, Mass.

  =McElroy, Rev. Charles J.=, rector, St. Augustine’s Church,
    Bridgeport, Conn.

  =McGann, James E.=, real estate, 902 Chapel Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =McGann, Col. James H.=, Providence, R. I.

  =McGauran, Michael S.= (M. D.), 285 Broadway, Lawrence, Mass.

  =McGillicuddy, Hon. D. J.=, of the law firm McGillicuddy & Morey,
    Lewiston, Me.; ex-mayor of Lewiston.

  =McGinn, P. F.=, 79 Friendship Street, Providence, R. I.

  =McGinness, Brig.-Gen. John R.= (U. S. A.), retired, Virginia Club,
    Norfolk, Va.; born in Ireland; cadet at United States Military
    Academy, July 1, 1859; first lieutenant of ordnance, June 11, 1863;
    captain, February 10, 1869; major, June 1, 1881; lieutenant-colonel,
    July 7, 1898; colonel, June 14, 1892; retired with the rank of
    brigadier-general, September 17, 1904.

  =McGolrick, Rev. E. J.=, 84 Herbert Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =McGolrick, Rt. Rev. James= (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
    diocese of Duluth, Minn. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McGovern, James=, 6 Wall Street, New York City; of Benedict, Drysdale
    & Co. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McGovern, Joseph P.=, of J. P. McGovern & Bro., fur brokers, 193
    Greene Street, New York City.

  =McGowan, Rear Admiral John=, U. S. N. (retired), 1739 N. Street, N.
    W., Washington, D. C. (Life member of the Society.) He was born at
    Port Penn, Del., August 4, 1843. He is a son of John and Catherine
    (Caldwell) McGowan. He was educated in the public schools of
    Philadelphia, Pa., 1848–’53, and in private schools in Elizabeth, N.
    J., 1854–’59. Entering the navy, he was appointed acting master’s
    mate, March 8, 1862; was promoted to acting master May 8, 1862, and
    ordered to command the U. S. S. _Wyandank_ in the Potomac flotilla.
    He served on the Potomac and Rappahannock rivers until February,
    1863, when he was detached from the _Wyandank_ and ordered to the
    _Florida_ as navigator. He served on the _Florida_ in the blockade
    off Wilmington, N. C., until October, 1864, when the ship went to
    New York for repairs. In November, of the same year, he was detached
    from the _Florida_ and ordered to the U. S. S. _State of Georgia_ as
    navigator; arrived off Wilmington, N. C., the day after the capture
    of Fort Fisher, his ship being then ordered to reinforce the fleet
    off Charleston, S. C. While there he took part in the Bulls Bay
    Expedition, which was one of the causes of the evacuation of
    Charleston by the Confederates. Soon after the evacuation, the
    _State of Georgia_ was ordered to Aspinwall (Colon) to protect
    American interests on the Isthmus of Panama. Before sailing for
    Aspinwall, McGowan succeeded Lieutenant Manly as executive officer
    of the ship. In November, 1865, he was ordered to the U. S. S.
    _Monongahela_ as watch and division officer; served on the
    _Monongahela_ in the West Indies until January, 1867, when he was
    detached and, a few days later, joined the U. S. S. _Tacony_,
    Commander Roe, fitting out for duty in the Gulf Squadron. He was at
    Vera Cruz nearly all the summer of 1867, which witnessed the fall of
    Maximilian’s empire. After the death of Maximilian, and the
    surrender of Vera Cruz to the Liberals, the _Tacony_ returned to
    Pensacola, Fla., but yellow fever breaking out aboard the ship, went
    to Portsmouth, N. H., where, after undergoing quarantine, the
    officers were detached and ordered to their homes the latter part of
    September, 1867. In October of the same year, McGowan was ordered to
    duty on board the receiving ship at the Philadelphia navy yard. He
    commanded the U. S. S. _Constellation_ there, and was afterward
    executive officer of the frigate _Potomac_, also a receiving ship,
    at Philadelphia. In March, 1868, while on the _Potomac_, he received
    a commission as master in the regular navy, and in October, 1868,
    was ordered to duty with the Asiatic fleet. On reporting to the
    admiral, he was ordered to duty as executive officer of the U. S. S.
    _Unadilla_; succeeded to the command of the _Unadilla_ in June,
    1869, and in November of that year was detached from the _Unadilla_
    and ordered to the U. S. S. _Iroquois_; returned in her to the
    United States, the ship going out of commission in April, 1870. In
    April, 1870, he was promoted to be lieutenant-commander and while in
    that grade served on the double-turreted monitor _Terror_, the
    _Wachusetts_, _Juniata_ and _Marion_ as executive officer, and at
    the League Island, Philadelphia and Brooklyn navy yards. In January,
    1887, he was promoted to commander; commanded the _Swatara_, _St.
    Mary’s_, _Portsmouth_ and _Alliance_, and was also commandant of the
    naval training station at Newport, R. I., from December, 1896, to
    July, 1899. He was promoted captain, February, 1899, and in August
    took command of the U. S. S. _Monadnock_ at Manila. In November,
    1900, he was ordered to duty as commandant of the naval station at
    Key West, Fla. In April, 1901, he was detached and ordered before
    the retiring board. He was retired, with the rank of rear admiral,
    in April, 1901. He resides in Washington, D. C., and is held in very
    high regard. In October, 1871, he wedded Evelyn Manderson of
    Philadelphia. Admiral McGowan is a member of the Military Order of
    the Loyal Legion, of the Order of Foreign Wars, the Sons of the
    Revolution, and of the Society of Marine Engineers and Naval
    Architects. He is also a member of the following clubs: the
    Metropolitan and Chevy Chase of Washington, D. C.; the Rittenhouse
    of Philadelphia, the Union of New York, and the New York Yacht Club.
    Admiral McGowan’s father, Capt. John McGowan, was appointed a
    lieutenant in the revenue cutter service by President Andrew
    Jackson. He was at Charleston, S. C., during the nullification
    period, served in the Seminole War, in the War with Mexico, and in
    the Civil War. He commanded the steamer _Star of the West_ in the
    attempt to reinforce Fort Sumter in 1861. He died in January, 1891,
    aged 85 years.

  =McGowan, P. F.=, manufacturer, 224 East 12th Street, New York City.
    (Life member of the Society); president of the board of aldermen.
    Born in Lebanon, Conn., in 1852; went to New York City in 1877 and
    subsequently engaged in the manufacturing business, in which he is
    still interested. On January 1, 1900, was appointed by Mayor Van
    Wyck as a commissioner of education for a term of three years;
    appointed by Mayor McClellan as a commissioner of education, July
    12, 1904, to fill the unexpired term of President H. A. Rogers, and
    while serving in that capacity was, in 1905, elected president of
    the board of aldermen for the term expiring January 1, 1910. Mr.
    McGowan is active in a number of benevolent and fraternal societies.
    He was a supreme representative of the Royal Arcanum and supreme
    councilor of the Loyal Association. He is a member of the Manhattan
    Club, of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick and of the Pensacola Club,
    of the Fourteenth Assembly District, where he resides. He is a
    trustee in St. Ann’s Roman Catholic Church, New York Polyclinic
    Hospital and the West Side Savings Bank.

  =McGuire, Edward J.=, lawyer, 52 Wall Street, New York City.

  =McGurrin, F. E.=, of F. E. McGurrin & Co., investment bankers,
    Security Trust Building, Salt Lake City, Utah; president of the Salt
    Lake Security & Trust Co.

  =McIntyre, John F.=, of the law firm Cantor, Adams & McIntyre, 25
    Broad Street, New York City.

  =McKelleget, George F.=, of the law firm R. J. & G. F. McKelleget,
    Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =McKelleget, Richard J.=, of the law firm R. J. & G. F. McKelleget,
    Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =McLaughlin, Henry V.= (M. D.), 40 Kent Street, Brookline, Mass.

  =McLaughlin, John=, builder, 348 East 81st Street, New York City.

  =McLaughlin, Marcus J.=, 250 West 25th Street, New York City.

  =McLaughlin, Thomas F.=, 19 East 87th Street, New York City.

  =McMahon, James=, 87 McDonough Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =McMahon, Rev. John W.= (D. D.), rector of St. Mary’s Church,
    Charlestown (Boston), Mass.

  =McManus, Col. John=, 87 Dorrance Street, Providence, R. I.; was
    appointed colonel of the Rhode Island Guards Regiment by Governor
    Van Zandt, in 1887; was one of the commissioners to revise the
    militia laws of the state; aide-de-camp, with the rank of colonel,
    on the staff of Governor Davis of Rhode Island; has been prominently
    identified with all movements for the betterment of Ireland—his
    native land; is of the firm John McManus & Co., prominent merchant
    tailors of Providence.

  =McManus, Michael=, of McManus & Co., Fall River, Mass.

  =McManus, Rev. Michael T.=, rector of St. Mary’s Church of the
    Assumption, Brookline, Mass.

  =McOwen, Anthony=, 515 Wales Avenue, Borough of the Bronx, New York
    City.

  =McPartland, John E.=, Park Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =McQuade, E. A.=, 75–77 Market Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =McQuaid, Rev. William P.=, rector of St. James’ Church, Harrison
    Avenue, Boston, Mass.

  =McSweeney, Edward F.=, _Evening Traveler_, Summer Street, Boston,
    Mass.

  =McTighe, P. J.=, McTighe Grocery Co., wholesale grocers, Fayette
    Street, Binghamton, N. Y.

  =McWalters, John P.=, 141 Broadway, New York City.

  =Magrane, P. B.=, dry goods merchant, Lynn, Mass.; and of the James A.
    Houston Co., Boston.

  =Magrath, Patrick F.=, 244 Front Street, Binghamton, N. Y. (Life
    member of the Society.)

  =Maguire, P. J.=, 204 Madison Street, New York City.

  =Maher, Stephen J.= (M. D.), 212 Orange Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Mahony, William H.=, dry goods, 844 Eighth Avenue, New York City.
    (Life member of the Society.)

  =Malloy, Gen. A. G.=, El Paso, Texas; a veteran of the Mexican and
    Civil wars; during the latter conflict he was successively major,
    colonel and brigadier-general; has been collector of the port of
    Galveston.

  =Maloney, Cornelius=, publisher of the _Daily Democrat_, Waterbury,
    Conn.

  =Maloney, Thomas E.= (M. D.), North Main Street, Fall River, Mass.

  =Marshall, Rev. George F.=, rector of St. Paul’s Church, Milford, N.
    H.

  =Martin, James=, recently managing editor, _New York Tribune_, New
    York City; now editor of the Newark (N. J.) _Advertiser_.

  =Martin, Hon. John B.=, penal institutions commissioner, 762 Fourth
    Street, South Boston, Mass.

  =Meade, Richard W.=, 125 East 24th Street, New York City; son of the
    first president-general of the Society.

  =Milholland, John E.=, Witherspoon Building, Philadelphia, Pa.;
    president of the Batcheller Pneumatic Tube Co., of Philadelphia;
    president of the Pneumatic Dispatch Manufacturing Co., of
    Pennsylvania; director in the Pearsall Pneumatic Tube and Power Co.,
    of New York, and a director in the Pneumatic Transit Co., of New
    Jersey. Under him the successful pneumatic tube of the large
    diameter has been constructed, and it is largely due to his energy
    and effort that the U. S. post-office department now considers a
    part of its general delivery system the pneumatic tube service. He
    is a member of the Transportation Club of New York, the New York
    Press Club, the Republican Club, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the
    American Museum of Natural History, and a number of other
    organizations.

  =Moloney, Fred G.=, Ottawa, Ill.

  =Moloney, Hon. Maurice T.=, lawyer, rooms 513–515 Moloney Building,
    Ottawa, Ill. He is a native of County Kerry, Ireland; came to the
    United States in 1867; graduated in law from the University of
    Virginia, class of 1871; admitted to the Virginia bar; removed to
    Illinois and was admitted to the bar of that state; served as city
    attorney of Ottawa, Ill., in 1879–’80 and 1881; was elected state’s
    attorney in 1884 and served four years; was elected attorney-general
    of Illinois and while in this position vigorously prosecuted illegal
    trusts and made a national reputation through his work; became mayor
    of Ottawa.

  =Molony, Henry A.=, of Molony & Carter, 16 New Street, Charleston, S.
    C.

  =Monaghan, Hon. James Charles=, U. S. Department of Commerce and
    Labor, Washington, D. C.; formerly U. S. consul at Mannheim and at
    Chemnitz; recently professor of commerce, University of Wisconsin.

  =Montfort, Richard=, Louisville, Ky.; chief engineer of the Louisville
    & Nashville R. R.

  =Montgomery, Gen. Phelps=, 39 Church Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Moran, Col. James=, Providence, R. I.; a veteran of the Civil War. He
    was appointed second lieutenant in the Third Regiment, Rhode Island
    Volunteers, by Special Orders 53, A. G. O., R. I., August 27, 1861;
    was commissioned second lieutenant, Fifth Rhode Island Heavy
    Artillery, November 5, 1861; mustered in December 16, 1861; in
    command of Company A, from August 8, 1862, until September 20, 1862;
    assumed command of Company D, September 26, 1862; was commissioned
    captain and mustered in as such February 14, 1863; on general court
    martial, July, 1863; in command of Fort Amory, at Newberne, N. C.,
    from September 1, 1863, until October 15, 1863; assumed command of
    post at Hatteras Inlet, N. C., April 21, 1864; in command of forts
    Foster and Parks, at Roanoke Island, from May 2, 1864, until
    January, 1865; mustered out January 17, 1865. In May, 1873, he was
    commissioned colonel of the Rhode Island Guards Regiment, and in
    June, 1887, became colonel of the Second Regiment, Brigade of Rhode
    Island Militia.

  =Moran, James= (M. D.), 345 West 58th Street, New York City.

  =Morgan, John=, 44 West 46th Street, New York City.

  =Morkan, Michael J.=, P. O. Box 543, Hartford, Conn.

  =Moriarty, John=, Broadway, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Morrissey, Very Rev. Andrew= (C. S. C., D. D., LL. D.), University of
    Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Ind.

  =Morrissy, Thomas=, 48–50 West 14th Street, New York City.

  =Moseley, Edward A.=, Washington, D. C., president-general of the
    Society in 1897 and 1898. He succeeded to the position, in the
    former year, on the death of Admiral Meade, who was the first
    president-general of the organization. Mr. Moseley is secretary of
    the U. S. Interstate Commerce Commission. He is ninth in descent
    from Lieut. Thaddeus Clark, who came from Ireland, and died in
    Portland, Me., May 16, 1690. Clark was lieutenant of a company of
    men engaged in the defence of Falmouth, now Portland, during the
    Indian War. He fell into ambuscade with his company while making a
    reconnoitre, and was killed with twelve of his men. Mr. Moseley is
    also a descendant of Deputy-Governor Cleeves (or Cleaves), a founder
    of Portland, formerly Falmouth, and is sixth in descent from Lieut.
    John Brown of Belfast, Me., who came with his father from
    Londonderry, Ire., and was one of the settlers of Londonderry, N.
    H.; Brown was chairman of the first board of selectmen of Belfast,
    Me., chosen November 11, 1773, ’74 and ’75; he removed from
    Londonderry, N. H. While residing there he had been a commissioned
    officer in the Provincial Army, and had served in the French War.
    Mr. Moseley is also of patriotic Revolutionary stock, and is a
    member of the Cincinnati.

  =Moynahan, Bartholomew=, lawyer, 120 Broadway, New York City; official
    stenographer to the New York Supreme Court.

  =Mullen, John F.=, 26 Trask Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Murphy, D. P., Jr.=, 31 Barclay Street, New York City.

  =Murphy, Edward J.=, of the Edward J. Murphy Co., real estate brokers,
    Springfield, Mass.

  =Murphy, Frank J.=, Lincoln Hotel, Ballston Spa, N. Y.

  =Murphy, Fred C.=, of the Edward J. Murphy Co., Springfield, Mass.

  =Murphy, James=, 42 Westminster Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Murphy, James R.=, lawyer, 27 School Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Murray, John F.=, captain of police, Cambridge, Mass.; residence, 9
    Avon Street.

  =Murray, Hon. Lawrence O.= (LL. D.), assistant secretary, U. S.
    Department of Commerce and Labor, Washington, D. C. He is a lawyer
    by profession. He first went to Washington as secretary to William
    Edmund Curtis, assistant secretary of the treasury. Subsequently, he
    held other positions in the treasury, including that of chief of
    division, and, from September 1, 1898, to June 27, 1899, that of
    deputy comptroller of the currency. He left the government
    employment to become the trust officer of the American Trust
    Company, continuing in that place for three years. He then went to
    Chicago as secretary of the Central Trust Company of Illinois and
    served there for two years before becoming assistant secretary of
    commerce and labor.

  =Murray, Patrick=, insurance, 318 West 52d Street, New York City.

  =Murray, Thomas Hamilton=, 36 Newbury Street, Boston, Mass.;
    secretary-general of the Society; a newspaper man of many years’
    experience, during which he has been editorially connected with
    journals in Boston and Lawrence, Mass., Providence, R. I., and
    Bridgeport and Meriden, Conn.; has devoted much attention to
    historical research, particularly in relation to the Irish element
    in American history, and has delivered addresses on the subject
    before the New England Historic Genealogical Society; the Rhode
    Island Historical Society; the Phi Kappa Sigma of Brown University;
    the Boston Charitable Irish Society (founded 1737), and other
    organizations; is the author of a number of papers, pamphlets and
    books.

  =Neagle, Rev. Richard=, Malden, Mass.

  =Noonan, Daniel A.=, 725 Broadway, New York City.

  =O’Brien, Hon. C. D.=, lawyer, Globe Building, St. Paul, Minn.;
    prosecuting attorney of Ramsey County, Minn., from 1874–’78;
    assistant U. S. district attorney from 1870–’73; mayor of St. Paul
    from 1883–’85.

  =O’Brien, Dennis F.=, of the law firm Sheahan & O’Brien, Banigan
    Building, Providence, R. I.

  =O’Brien, Rev. James J.=, 185 Summer Street, Somerville, Mass.; a son
    of the late Mayor Hugh O’Brien of Boston, Mass.

  =O’Brien, John D.=, Bank of Minnesota Building, St. Paul, Minn.; of
    the law firm Stevens, O’Brien, Cole & Albrecht.

  =O’Brien, Hon. Morgan J.= (LL. D.), 729 Park Avenue, New York City; a
    justice of the New York Supreme Court; trustee of the New York
    Public Library.

  =O’Brien, Patrick=, of Driscoll & O’Brien, contractors, 399 South
    Broadway, Lawrence, Mass.

  =O’Byrne, M. A.=, 370 West 118th Street, New York City.

  =O’Callaghan, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Denis= (D. D.), rector of St. Augustine’s
    Church, South Boston, Mass.

  =O’Connell, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Denis Joseph= (S. T. D.), rector of the
    Catholic University, Washington, D. C.

  =O’Connell, John=, 302 West End Avenue, New York City.

  =O’Connell, John F.=, 306 Broadway, Providence, R. I.

  =O’Connell, Joseph F.=, lawyer, 53 State Street, Boston, Mass.

  =O’Connell, P. A.=, of the James A. Houston Co., Boston, Mass.

  =O’Connor, Edward=, 302 Broadway, New York City.

  =O’Connor, Hon. J. J.=, 414–416 Carroll Street, Elmira, N. Y. (Life
    member of the Society.)

  =O’Connor, J. L.=, Ogdensburg, N. Y.

  =O’Connor, M. P.=, Binghamton, N. Y. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Connor, Thomas=, 920 East 156th Street, New York City.

  =O’Doherty, Rev. James=, Haverhill, Mass. (Life member of the
    Society.)

  =O’Doherty, Hon. Matt.=, Louisville, Ky.; a judge of the Circuit
    Court.

  =O’Donovan, Jeremiah (Rossa)=, New York City.

  =O’Donnell, Rev. James H.=, rector, St. Mary’s Church, Norwalk, Conn.

  =O’Donnell, Hon. John B.=, lawyer, Northampton, Mass.; ex-mayor of
    Northampton.

  =O’Dwyer, Hon. E. F.=, 37 West 76th Street, New York City; chief
    justice of the City Court of New York.

  =O’Farrell, P. A.=, Waldorf-Astoria, New York City. (Life member of
    the Society.)

  =O’Flaherty, James=, advertising, 22 North William Street, New York
    City.

  =O’Gorman, Hon. J. A.=, 318 West 108th Street, New York City; a
    justice of the New York Supreme Court.

  =O’Gorman, Thomas A.=, the O’Gorman Co., Providence, R. I.

  =O’Hagan, W. J.=, of W. J. O’Hagan & Son, colonial antiques,
    Charleston, S. C.

  =O’Herin, William=, Parsons, Labette County, Kan.; superintendent of
    machinery and equipment, Missouri, Kansas & Texas Railway. (Life
    member of the Society.)

  =O’Keefe, Edmund=, 174 Middle Street, New Bedford, Mass.

  =O’Keefe, J. A.= (M. D.), Broadway, Providence, R. I.,
    lieutenant-colonel, Second Regiment, B. R. I. M.

  =O’Keefe, John A.=, 25 Exchange Street, Lynn, Mass.; a native of
    Rockport, Mass.; was graduated from Harvard College, class of 1880;
    member of the Phi Beta Kappa; taught school in Housatonic, Mass.;
    was elected sub-master of the Lynn (Mass.) High School in 1881 and
    headmaster of the same in 1885; became a member of the teaching
    staff of the English High School, Boston, Mass.; studied law; was
    admitted to the bar of Essex County, Mass., and has since practiced
    law in Lynn. In 1897 he was the Democratic candidate for
    attorney-general of Massachusetts. Member of the Lynn Board of
    Associated Charities; member of the New England Association of
    Colleges and Preparatory Schools; of the Essex Institute, and of the
    executive board of the Civic League of Lynn. Among Mr. O’Keefe’s
    classmates at Harvard were: Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, president of
    the United States; Hon. William S. Andrews, justice of the New York
    Supreme Court; Robert Bacon, partner of J. P. Morgan; Harold N.
    Fowler, professor of Latin; Hon. Josiah Quincy, mayor of Boston,
    Mass.; Albert Bushnell Hart, historian and professor, and many other
    people of note.

  =O’Leary, Jeremiah=, 275 58th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =O’Leary, P. J.=, 161 West 13th Street, New York City.

  =O’Loughlin, Patrick=, lawyer, 18 Tremont Street, Boston, Mass.

  =O’Meara, Maurice=, president of the Maurice O’Meara Co., paper
    manufacturers, 448 Pearl Street, New York City.

  =O’Neil, Frank S.=, lawyer, O’Neil Building, Binghamton, N. Y.

  =O’Neil, Hon. George F.=, capitalist, Binghamton, N. Y. (Life member
    of the Society.)

  =O’Neil, Hon. Joseph H.=, president of the Federal Trust Co., Boston,
    Mass.; formerly a member of Congress; was later U. S. treasurer at
    Boston.

  =O’Neil, Rev. John P.=, Peterborough, N. H.

  =O’Neill, Rev. Daniel H.=, 935 Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =O’Neill, Rev. D. P.=, Westchester, N. Y.

  =O’Neill, Eugene M.=, Pittsburg, Pa. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Neill, James L.=, 220 Franklin Street, Elizabeth, N. J.; connected
    with the Elizabeth post-office for many years past; he has been
    president of the Young Men’s Father Mathew T. A. Society, and
    treasurer of St. Patrick’s Alliance, Elizabeth. He was one of the
    prime movers in the projection and completion of a monument to the
    late Mayor Mack of Elizabeth.

  =O’Rourke, Hon. Jeremiah=, of J. O’Rourke & Sons, architects, 756
    Broad Street, Newark, N. J.; U. S. supervising architect under
    President Cleveland. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Sullivan, Humphrey=, treasurer of the O’Sullivan Rubber Co.,
    Lowell, Mass.

  =O’Sullivan, James=, president of the O’Sullivan Rubber Co., Lowell,
    Mass.

  =O’Sullivan, John=, with the H. B. Claflin Co., Church Street, New
    York City.

  =O’Sullivan, Sylvester J.=, 66 Liberty Street, New York City, manager
    of the New York office of the United States Fidelity and Guaranty
    Co., of Baltimore, Md.

  =Owens, Joseph E.=, of the law firm Ketcham & Owens, 189 Montague
    Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Patterson, Rev. George J.=, rector of St. Vincent’s Church, South
    Boston, Mass.

  =Phelan, Hon. James D.=, Phelan Building, San Francisco, Cal.;
    recently mayor of San Francisco.

  =Phelan, James J.=, 16 Exchange Place, New York City; treasurer of the
    King’s County Refrigerating Co.; director in the Stuyvesant
    Insurance Co.; director in the Cosmopolitan Fire Insurance Co. When
    Ferdinand de Lesseps contracted to build the Panama Canal, Mr.
    Phelan became treasurer and manager of the American Contracting and
    Dredging Co., in which he was associated with the late Eugene Kelly,
    George Bliss, H. B. Slaven and others. This company contracted for
    and built fifteen miles of the canal. In 1891 Mr. Phelan was
    appointed treasurer of the department of docks of the City of New
    York, which office he held for five years.

  =Phelan, John J.=, lawyer, 7 Wall Street, New York City; graduate of
    Manhattan College and of the Columbia Law School; member of the
    Xavier Alumni Sodality, the N. Y. Catholic Club, and the Manhattan
    Alumni Society.

  =Phelan, Rev. J.=, Marcus, Ia.

  =Philbin, Eugene A.=, of the law firm Philbin, Beekman & Menken, 111
    Broadway, New York City.

  =Piggott, Michael=, 1634 Vermont Street, Quincy, Ill.; a veteran of
    the Civil War. He was made second lieutenant of Company F, Western
    Sharpshooters, in 1861, while at Camp Benton, St. Louis, Mo.; was
    promoted first lieutenant, and while at Fort Donaldson, in the
    spring of 1862, was made captain; lost a leg at Resaca, Ga., in May,
    1864; was subsequently connected with the U. S. revenue service;
    messenger in the national House of Representatives, Washington, D.
    C.; was made postmaster of Quincy, Ill., during President Grant’s
    first term, and held the position for over sixteen years; was
    appointed special Indian agent by President Harrison, and in that,
    as in every position held, displayed eminent ability.

  =Pigott, William=, iron and steel, Alaska Building, Seattle, Wash.
    (Life member of the Society.)

  =Plunkett, Thomas=, 257 Sixth Street, East Liverpool, O.

  =Power, Rev. James W.=, 47 East 129th Street, New York City.

  =Powers, Patrick H.=, president of the Emerson Piano Co., 120 Boylston
    Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Prendergast, W. A.=, 20 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Quinlan, Francis J.= (M. D., LL. D.), 33 West 38th Street, New York
    City; was for a number of years surgeon in the U. S. Indian service;
    recently president of the New York Celtic Medical Society; president
    of the County Medical Association of New York; member of the State
    Medical Association, of the American Medical Association, and of the
    Academy of Medicine. Besides holding these positions of honor and
    responsibility, he is visiting surgeon to St. Vincent’s Hospital,
    New York City, to the New York City Hospital, to the Foundling
    Hospital and St. Joseph’s Hospital, Yonkers, N. Y. He is professor
    of Laryngology and Rhinology in New York Polyclinic and
    Laryngologist and Otologist to St. John’s Hospital, Long Island
    City.

  =Quinlan, John J.=, secretary, McNab & Harlin Mfg. Co., 50–56 John
    Street, New York City.

  =Quinn, John=, lawyer, 120 Broadway, New York City.

  =Quinn, W. Johnson=, manager of the Hotel Empire, New York City.

  =Regan, John H.=, lawyer, 422 55th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Regan, W. P.=, architect, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Reilly, Robert J.=, Cedar Street, Bangor, Me.

  =Richardson, Stephen J.=, 1785 Madison Avenue, New York City.

  =Roach, James F.=, 5822 Fifth Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Rogan, John H.=, lawyer, 145 Nassau Street, New York City.

  =Rohan, John D.=, 49 Wall Street, New York City.

  =Rooney, John Jerome=, of Rooney & Spence, customs and insurance
    brokers, forwarding agents, 66, 68 and 70 Beaver Street, New York
    City.

  =Roosevelt, Hon. Theodore=, president of the United States, White
    House, Washington, D. C.

  =Rorke, James=, 40 Barclay Street, New York City.

  =Ryan, Charles V.=, Springfield, Mass.

  =Ryan, Christopher S.=, Lexington, Mass.

  =Ryan, James T.=, 68 William Street, New York City.

  =Ryan, John J.=, 171 East 94th Street, New York City.

  =Ryan, Michael=, 377 Broadway, New York City.

  =Ryan, Michael J.=, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Ryan, Nicholas W.=, 1444 Boston Road, Borough of the Bronx, New York
    City.

  =Ryan, Hon. Patrick J.=, mayor-elect of Elizabeth, N. J.; is of the
    firm P. J. & W. H. Ryan, real estate and fire insurance, 205 Broad
    Street, Elizabeth.

  =Ryan, Most Rev. Patrick J.= (D. D.), archbishop of Philadelphia, Pa.;
    the Cathedral, Philadelphia.

  =Ryan, Richard=, Rutland, Vt.

  =Ryan, Timothy M.= (M. D.), Torrington, Conn.

  =Ryan, Hon. William=, of Wm. Ryan & Co., grocers, Port Chester, N. Y.

  =Sanders, Col. C. C.=, Gainesville, Ga.; president of the State
    Banking Co. of Gainesville; alternate commissioner to World’s Fair,
    Chicago, Ill., 1893; vice-president for Georgia, American Bankers’
    Association. Colonel Sanders is of Irish and English ancestry. On
    the maternal side he is descended from Thomas and Theodosia M.
    Smyth, who emigrated from Ireland in 1793, landing in Charleston, S.
    C. They settled in Jones County, Ga. Thomas died November 28, 1799.
    On the paternal side Colonel Sanders is a descendant of Rev. Moses
    Sanders, who emigrated from England, with two brothers, John and
    David, and arrived in Petersburg, Va., 1765. They embraced the
    patriotic cause in the Revolution and were active in operations
    against the British. Colonel Sanders, the subject of this sketch,
    graduated from the Georgia Military Institute, in June, 1861;
    entered the Confederate service; was made lieutenant-colonel of the
    Twenty-fourth Regiment of Infantry, Georgia Volunteers, August,
    1861; served under General Lee in the Peninsular campaign, in the
    seven days’ battles around Richmond, Va., and was among the bravest
    of the brave; commanded his regiment at Malvern Hill and at Marye’s
    Heights, Fredericksburg, where the Twenty-fourth was a part of the
    Confederate forces that received the valorous charges of Meagher’s
    Irish Brigade. He also commanded the regiment at the battles of
    Chancellorsville and Antietam, at which latter conflict he was
    placed in command of Wofford’s Brigade. While in this position he
    met a bayonet charge from the Federals by a counter bayonet charge,
    and in the desperate fighting that ensued, fifty-eight per cent. of
    Sanders’ heroic force was swept away. Colonel Sanders also led the
    Twenty-fourth at Cedar Creek, Chickamauga, Knoxville, the
    Wilderness, Spottsylvania Court House, and Sailor’s Creek. On April
    6, 1865, Ewell’s Corps, to which Colonel Sanders’ regiment was then
    attached, was captured, and Colonel Sanders was sent as a prisoner
    of war to Washington, D. C. Writing of Meagher’s Irish Brigade,
    Colonel Sanders says: “I was in command of the Twenty-fourth Georgia
    Regiment, with other troops, at the foot of Marye’s Heights,
    receiving the five heroic and gallant charges of the Irish Brigade,
    whose prodigies of valor have filled the country with admiration. I
    saw the devoted Irish charge up to our breastworks, to be mowed down
    by a line of Confederate fire that no soldiers could withstand. I
    saw the Irish battalions cut down like grain before the reaper, yet
    the survivors would magnificently close up their ranks only to have
    huge gaps again cut through them. When forced back they rallied and
    came bravely on again, only to be riddled with bullets and torn by
    artillery. Their fifth charge was made with greatly decimated ranks
    that slowly recoiled like the waves of a tempestuous sea. When
    twilight descended upon the scene, a spectacle was presented
    unequaled in warfare. At least three fourths of my command was
    composed of men of Irish descent and knew that the gallant dead in
    our front were our kindred of the land beyond the sea. When, one by
    one, the stars came out that night, many tears were shed by Southern
    Confederate eyes for the heroic Federal Irish dead.” During the war
    Colonel Sanders was offered the rank of brigadier-general but
    declined the same.

  =Sasseen, Robert A.=, 50 Pine Street, New York City; insurance
    investments. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Scott, Joseph=, lawyer, Bradbury Building, Los Angeles, Cal.

  =Shahan, Very Rev. Thomas J.= (S. T. D., J. U. L.), professor of
    church history, Catholic University, Washington, D. C.; S. T. D.,
    Propaganda, Rome, 1882; J. U. L., Roman Seminary, 1889.

  =Shanahan, Very Rev. Edmund T.= (Ph. D., S. T. D., J. C. L.),
    professor of dogmatic theology, Catholic University, Washington, D.
    C.; A. B., Boston College, 1888; S. T. D., Propaganda, Rome, 1893;
    J. C. L., Roman Seminary, Rome, 1895; Ph. D., Roman Academy, 1895.
    Instructor in philosophy and dogmatic theology, American College,
    Rome, 1894–’95; lecturer in philosophy, University of Pennsylvania,
    1898–’99; associate professor of philosophy, the Catholic University
    of America, 1895–1901.

  =Shanley, John F.=, 17 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Shanley, Thomas J.=, 344 West 87th Street, New York City.

  =Shea, Daniel W.= (Ph. D.), professor of physics, Catholic University,
    Washington, D. C.; A. B., Harvard University, 1886; A. M., Harvard
    University, 1888; Ph. D., Berlin, 1892. Assistant in physics,
    Harvard University, 1889 and 1892; assistant professor of physics in
    the University of Illinois, 1892–’93; professor of physics in the
    University of Illinois, 1893–’95.

  =Shea, John B.=, 19 Maiden Lane, New York City.

  =Sheedy, Bryan DeF.= (M. D.), 162 West 73d Street, New York City.

  =Sheran, Hugh F.=, 46 Woodbine Street, Roxbury (Boston), Mass.

  =Sherman, P. Tecumseh=, of the law firm Taft & Sherman, 15 William
    Street, New York City; member of the Union League Club and of the
    Military Order of the Loyal Legion; son of the late Gen. William T.
    Sherman.

  =Shuman, A.=, merchant clothier, 440 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Slattery, John J.=, president Todd-Donigan Iron Co., Louisville, Ky.

  =Sligo Social Club=, Roxbury (Boston), Mass. (M. J. Mulroy, secretary,
    24 Faxon Street, Roxbury.)

  =Sloane, Charles W.=, lawyer, 54 William Street, New York City.

  =Smith, Hon. Andrew C.= (M. D.), Dekum Building, Portland, Oregon;
    president of the State Board of Health; president of the Hibernia
    Savings Bank; member of the state Senate from 1900 to 1904; has
    served on the staff of St. Vincent’s Hospital for fourteen years;
    has been president of the State and City Medical societies;
    represented Oregon for two years in the House of Delegates of the
    American Medical Association.

  =Smith, James=, 26 Broadway, New York City.

  =Smith, Rev. James J.=, 88 Central Street, Norwich, Conn.

  =Smith, Joseph=, Lowell, Mass.

  =Smith, Thomas F.=, clerk of the city court, 32 Chambers Street, New
    York City.

  =Smyth, Rev. Hugh P.=, rector of St. John’s Church, Lawrence Avenue,
    Roxbury (Boston), Mass.

  =Smyth, Rev. Thomas=, Springfield, Mass.

  =Smyth, Rev. Thomas M.=, East Liverpool, O.

  =Somers, P. E.=, manufacturer of tacks and nails, Worcester, Mass.
    (Life member of the Society.)

  =Spellacy, Thomas J.=, lawyer, 26 State Street, Hartford, Conn.

  =Spillane, J. B.=, managing editor _Music Trade Review_, Metropolitan
    Life Building, 1 Madison Avenue, New York City.

  =Stang, Rt. Rev. William= (D. D.), Fall River, Mass., bishop of the
    Roman Catholic diocese of Fall River.

  =Steele, Hon. John H.=, Phenix Building, Minneapolis, Minn.

  =Storen, William J.=, 232 Calhoun Street, Charleston, S. C.

  =Sullivan, James E.= (M. D.), Providence, R. I.; was graduated from
    Bellevue Hospital Medical College, New York, 1879; also studied
    medicine in Dublin, London and Paris; was city physician of Fall
    River, Mass., for seven years; married, in 1885, Alice, daughter of
    the late Joseph Banigan of Providence; retired from practice in
    1891; member of the Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Providence
    Medical societies; vice-president of the University Club,
    Providence; a director of the Rhode Island Hospital Trust Co.;
    president and treasurer of the Sullivan Investment Co., Providence.

  =Sullivan, John B.=, contractor, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Sullivan, John J.=, 61–63 Quincy Market, Boston, Mass.; of Doe,
    Sullivan & Co.

  =Sullivan, John J.=, lawyer, 203 Broadway, New York City.

  =Sullivan, M. B.= (M. D.), Dover, N. H., formerly a state senator.

  =Sullivan, M. F.= (M. D.), Oak Street, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Michael X.= (Ph. D.), instructor, Brown University,
    Providence, R. I.

  =Sullivan, Roger G.=, cigar manufacturer, 803 Elm Street, Manchester,
    N. H.

  =Sullivan, T. P.= (M. D.), 318 South Main Street, Fall River, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Timothy P.=, Concord, N. H.; furnished granite from his New
    Hampshire quarries for the new national Library Building,
    Washington, D. C.

  =Sullivan, William B.=, lawyer, Tremont Building, Boston, Mass.

  =Supple, Rev. James N.=, rector of St. Francis de Sales Church,
    Charlestown (Boston), Mass.

  =Sweeney, John F.=, the Sweeney Co., 256 Main Street, Buffalo, N. Y.
    (Life member of the Society.)

  =Sweeney, Rev. Timothy P.=, St. Patrick’s Church, Fall River, Mass.

  =Sweeney, William Montgomery=, 120 Franklin Street, Astoria, L. I., N.
    Y.

  =Swords, Joseph F.=, superintendent, Platt National Park, Sulphur,
    Indian Territory. He is a descendant of Cornet George Swords, one of
    the A. D. 1649 officers in the service of Kings Charles I and
    Charles II in Ireland. Joseph F. Swords is a member of the Sons of
    the American Revolution. He is of the fourth American generation
    from Francis Dawson Swords, graduate of Trinity College, Dublin,
    1750, who was exiled from Ireland, 1760, and who served in the
    Patriot Army throughout the War of the Revolution.

  =Tack, Theodore E.=, 52 Broadway, New York City.

  =Taggart, Hon. Thomas=, Indianapolis, Ind.; proprietor of the Grand
    Hotel there; was elected auditor of Marion County, 1886; re-elected,
    1890; has been mayor of Indianapolis; chairman of the Democratic
    state committee, 1892 and 1894; district chairman of the Seventh
    Congressional District; member from Indiana of the Democratic
    national committee. Is a native of Ireland.

  =Teeling, Rt. Rev. Arthur J.= (D. D.), rector of St. Mary’s Church,
    Lynn, Mass.

  =Thompson, Frank=, 257 West 129th Street, New York City.

  =Thompson, Frank V.=, 116 Princeton Street, East Boston, Mass.

  =Thompson, James=, of James Thompson & Bro., Louisville, Ky.

  =Tierney, Dennis H.=, real estate and insurance, Tierney’s Block, Bank
    Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Tierney, Edward M.=, Hotel Marlborough, Broadway, New York City.

  =Tierney, Henry S.=, Torrington, Conn.

  =Tierney, Myles=, 317 Riverside Drive, New York City. (Life member of
    the Society.) President, Hudson Trust Co., Hoboken, N. J.

  =Toale, Patrick P.=, Toale P. O., Aiken County, S. C.

  =Travers, Vincent P.=, of the Travers Brothers Co., 41 Worth Street,
    New York City.

  =Tully, Hon. William J.=, Corning, N. Y.; a state senator.

  =Twohy, George J.=, trust officer, the Citizens’ Bank of Norfolk, Va.

  =Vincent, John=, lawyer, 45 Cedar Street, New York City; was first
    assistant district attorney under the late Hon. John McKeon for two
    years, and on his death was appointed by the court as his successor
    _ad interim_.

  =Vredenburgh, Watson, Jr.=, civil engineer, 32 Broadway, New York
    City.

  =Waldron, E. M.=, of E. M. Waldron & Co., building contractors, 84
    South Sixth Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walker, William O’Brien=, 90 Wall Street, New York City, a descendant
    of the Revolutionary O’Briens of Machias, Me.

  =Wallace, Rev. T. H.=, Lewiston, Me.

  =Waller, Hon. Thomas M.=, New London, Conn.; lawyer; member of the
    Connecticut Legislature, 1867, 1868, 1872, 1876; (speaker, 1876);
    secretary of state of Connecticut, 1870; mayor of New London, 1873;
    state’s attorney, 1876–’83; governor of Connecticut, 1882–’84;
    United States consul-general to London, England, 1885–’89;
    commissioner to World’s Columbian Exposition.

  =Walsh, Frank=, secretary and credit manager, Wilkinson, Gaddis & Co.,
    wholesale grocers, 866–868 Broad Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walsh, P. J.=, 503 Fifth Avenue, New York City.

  =Walsh, Philip C.=, 260 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.; of Walsh’s
    Sons & Co., dealers in irons and metals.

  =Walsh, Philip C., Jr.=, 260 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walsh, Wm. P.=, 247 Water Street, Augusta, Me.

  =Ward, Edward=, of Ward Bros., contractors, Kennebunk, Me.

  =Ward, John T.=, Kennebunk, Me.

  =Ward, Michael J.=, Brookline, Mass.

  =Wilhere, Hon. M. F.=, 31st and Master streets, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Wright, Henry=, enameled wall tile, vitrified and glazed ceramics,
    aseptic floors, encaustic and embossed tiles, 584 East 148th Street,
    New York City.

  =Zabriskie, George A.=, 123 Produce Exchange, New York City.




                   PRESIDENTS-GENERAL OF THE SOCIETY.


 1897. Rear-Admiral George W. Meade, U. S. N. (retired), Philadelphia,
         Pa. Died May 4, 1897.

 1897. Hon. Edward A. Moseley, secretary of the Interstate Commerce
         Commission, Washington, D. C.; was elected president-general on
         death of Admiral Meade.

 1898. Hon. Edward A. Moseley, Washington, D. C.

 1899. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass.; a prominent lawyer of that
         city; ex-member of the Police Commission; member of the Boston
         Transit Commission.

 1900. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass.

 1901. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City; prominent capitalist;
         official in banks, trust companies and other corporations.

 1902. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City.

 1903. Hon. William McAdoo, New York City; assistant secretary of the U.
         S. Navy under President Cleveland; prominent lawyer; ex-member
         of Congress; police commissioner of the City of New York.

 1904. Hon. William McAdoo, New York City.

 1905. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City.

 1906. Rear-Admiral John McGowan, U. S. N. (retired), Washington, D. C.




  GENERAL INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


The Society was organized on January 20, 1897, in Boston, Mass., and now
has members in many states, the District of Columbia, one territory and
three foreign countries.

Briefly stated, the object of the organization is to make better known
the Irish chapter in American history.

There are two classes of members in the organization,—Life and Annual.
The life membership fee is $50 (paid once). The fee for annual members
is $5, paid yearly. In the case of new annual members, the initiation
fee, $5, also pays the membership dues for the first year.

The board of government comprises a president-general, a
vicepresident-general, a secretary-general, a treasurer-general, a
librarian and archivist, and an executive council. There are also state
vice-presidents.

The Society has already issued several bound volumes and a number of
other publications. These have been distributed to the members and to
public libraries; also to historical organizations and to universities.
Each member of the Society is entitled, free of charge, to a copy of
every publication issued from the time of his admittance. These
publications are of great interest and value, and are more than an
equivalent for the membership fee.

The Society draws no lines of creed or politics. Being an American
organization in spirit and principle, it welcomes to its ranks Americans
of whatever race descent, and of whatever creed, who take an interest in
the objects for which the Society is organized. Membership application
blanks will be furnished on request.

The membership includes many people of prominence, and has been
addressed by many distinguished men. It occupies a position in the front
rank of American historical organizations.




          GOOD WORDS FOR VOL. V OF THE JOURNAL OF THE SOCIETY.


Volume V of the Society’s Journal, covering the year 1905, was greeted
with sentiments of high commendation as the preceding volumes had been.
The following extracts are reproduced from a mass of acknowledgments,
received by Secretary T. H. Murray, relative to the volume:

  From the Rev. Richard Neagle, Malden, Mass.: “Dear Sir, I
  acknowledge, with thanks, the receipt of the Journal, Volume V.”

  From Mr. James H. Devlin, Jr., Boston, Mass.: “I have just received
  the Journal of the Historical Society, for which please accept my
  thanks.”

  From Mr. M. H. Cox, Boston, Mass.: “I beg to acknowledge receipt of
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, and am much
  pleased with it.”

  From M. S. McGauran, M. D., Lawrence, Mass.: “Volume V of the
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society is received. I am
  well pleased with the work.”

  From Mr. W. H. Mahony, New York City: “I have received the fifth
  volume of the Journal of the A. I. H. S., and look forward with
  great pleasure to its perusal.”

  From the Watertown (Mass.) Free Public Library: “The Trustees
  gratefully acknowledge your gift of Volume V of the Journal of your
  Society. S. F. Whitney, Librarian.”

  From the Boston Athenæum: “The library committee gratefully
  acknowledge the gift of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society, Volume V. Chas. K. Bolton, Librarian.”

  From Mr. Laurence Clancy, Oswego, N. Y.: “I gladly acknowledge
  receipt of Volume V of the Journal of the American Irish Historical
  Society. I wish you health, happiness and success.”

  From Mr. Alfred L. Doyle, New York City: “In behalf of my father,
  brother and myself, I wish to acknowledge receipt of the Journal of
  the American-Irish Historical Society for 1905.”

  From Yale University: “The president and fellows of Yale University
  gratefully acknowledge the receipt of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V. J. C. Schwab,
  Librarian.”

  From Mr. James L. O’Neill, Elizabeth, N. J.: “Am delighted with
  Volume V of the Journal of our Society just received. It is a credit
  to the organization and worthy of the volumes that have preceded
  it.”

  From Mr. Henry Stoddard Ruggles, Wakefield, Mass.: “Accept my thanks
  for the fifth volume of the Society’s admirable Journal, which I had
  the pleasure to receive through your thoughtful courtesy.”

  From the Hon. P. T. Barry, Chicago, Ill.: “The Society’s latest
  volume has been received, and I am sure I shall very much enjoy
  reading it. It makes a fitting companion for the other volumes of
  the Society.”

  From Capt. James Connolly, Coronado, Cal.: “Volume V of the Journal
  of our Historical Society has reached me. I am delighted with it and
  compliment you and the Society upon the excellence of the book.”

  From the Medford (Mass.) Public Library: “The library has received
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, for which the
  trustees return grateful acknowledgment. Mary E. Sargent,
  Librarian.”

  From the Portland (Me.) Public Library: “The library has received
  your gift, Journal of the American-Irish Society, Volume V, which is
  hereby gratefully acknowledged for the trustees. Alice C. Furbish,
  Librarian.”

  From the Elizabeth (N. J.) Public Library and Reading Room: “The
  board of trustees acknowledge with thanks your recent contribution
  of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V,
  to the library.”

  From the University of Chicago: “I have the honor to acknowledge the
  receipt of Volume V of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society as a gift to the library. Very truly, Zella Allen Dixson,
  Librarian.”

  From the Duluth (Minn.) Public Library: “The directors gratefully
  acknowledge the receipt of Volume V of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society. A gift to the library. Lydia M.
  Poirier, Librarian.”

  From the Nashua (N. H.) Public Library: “The library has received
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, for
  which the trustees return a grateful acknowledgment. Harriet
  Crombie, Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Toledo, Ohio: “The receipt of your gift to
  this library of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society
  is hereby gratefully acknowledged. Very respectfully, Willis F.
  Sewall, Librarian.”

  From the Hartford (Conn.) Public Library: “The officers of the
  Hartford Public Library acknowledge with thanks the receipt of the
  Journal, Volume V, a gift from the American-Irish Historical
  Society. C. M. Hewins, Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Denver, Col.: “The Public Library of the
  City and County of Denver acknowledges with thanks the receipt of
  Volume V, Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society.
  Respectfully, C. R. Dudley.”

  From the Most Rev. John J. Keane, D. D., archbishop of Dubuque, Ia.:
  “I return thanks for the splendid volume of the Proceedings of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, and wish the Society continued
  prosperity and usefulness.”

  From the Public Library, Holyoke, Mass.: “Please accept the thanks
  of this library for a copy of the Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society, Volume V, recently received. Very truly yours,
  Frank G. Willcox, librarian.”

  From the Public Library of Cincinnati, Ohio: “The library has
  received the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V, for which the board of trustees returns a grateful
  acknowledgment. N. D. C. Hodges, Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Cleveland, Ohio: “We are in receipt of
  Volume V of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  for which please accept the thanks of myself and the library board.
  Yours truly, W. H. Brett, Librarian.”

  From the Robbins Library, Arlington, Mass.: “The trustees return
  their grateful acknowledgments to the American-Irish Historical
  Society for the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V. E. J. Newton, Librarian.”

  From the Harris Institute Library, Woonsocket, R. I.: “Harris
  Institute Library acknowledges with thanks the receipt of a copy of
  Volume V of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society.
  Very truly, A. H. Ward, Librarian.”

  From the University of Pennsylvania: “I have the honor to
  acknowledge the receipt of Volume V of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Society, 1905, and beg to return thanks for the same.
  Very respectfully, Morris Jastrow, Jr., Librarian.”

  From the Ferguson Library, Stamford, Conn.: “Please accept our
  thanks for the copy of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society, Volume V, which we have recently received. Yours very
  truly, E. Van Howenberg, Librarian.”

  From the Enoch Pratt Free Library, Baltimore, Md.: “The trustees
  acknowledge with thanks the gift of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, from the American-Irish
  Historical Society. Bernard C. Steiner, Librarian.”

  From Clark University, Worcester, Mass.: “Please accept the thanks
  of the University for your gift of the Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society, Volume V, the receipt of which is hereby
  acknowledged. Louis N. Wilson, Librarian.”

  From the People’s Library, Newport, R. I.: “On behalf of the
  People’s Library of Newport, I beg to thank you for your gift of
  Volume V of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society.
  Very truly yours, J. E. Gardner, Librarian.”

  From the Library of Leland Stanford Junior University, California:
  “The library acknowledges, with thanks, the receipt of your gift of
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V.
  Respectfully yours, Melvin G. Dodge, Librarian.”

  From the Massachusetts Historical Society, Boston: “This society
  wishes to acknowledge the receipt of a copy of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, for which it returns
  grateful thanks. Samuel A. Green, Librarian.”

  From the Providence (R. I.) Public Library: “The trustees of the
  Providence Public Library have received from the American-Irish
  Historical Society, Volume V of the Journal, for which they return
  their thanks. William E. Foster, Librarian.”

  From the Rev. Austin Dowling, Providence, R. I.: “I have received
  Volume V of the Journal of the American Irish Historical Society—as
  usual, extremely interesting and valuable. With best wishes to
  yourself and congratulations on your splendid work.”

  From the Public Library, Brookline, Mass.: “In behalf of the
  trustees I return a grateful acknowledgment of the work mentioned
  below, a gift to the library. Louisa M. Hooper, Librarian. (Journal
  of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V.)”

  From the University of Maine: “In behalf of the university, it gives
  me pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of the following book which
  has been added to the library through your courtesy: Journal, Vol.
  5. Yours truly, Ralph K. Jones, Librarian.”

  From the U. S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Md.: “I have the pleasure
  of acknowledging the receipt of the following gift to this library:
  The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V. Very
  respectfully, A. N. Brown, Professor, Librarian.”

  From Cornell University: “I beg to acknowledge with best thanks the
  receipt of your gift to the library: The Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, by Thomas Hamilton Murray, Volume
  V. Very truly yours, Geo. Wm. Harris, Librarian.”

  From Miss Helen Prendergast, Mayville, Chautauqua County, N. Y.: “I
  am desirous of extending my sincere thanks for a copy of Volume V of
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society. I have read
  most of it and find it very interesting and instructive.”

  From the librarian of the George Washington University, Washington,
  D. C.: “On behalf of the George Washington University, I wish to
  acknowledge gratefully the receipt of a copy of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society for 1905, Volume V.”

  From the Reynolds Library, Rochester, N. Y.: “The trustees of the
  Reynolds Library acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your gift,
  named below. Alfred S. Collins, Librarian. (Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V. 8vo. Boston, 1905.)”

  From Tufts College, Medford, Mass.: “The trustees of Tufts College
  have received from Mr. Thomas Hamilton Murray, secretary, the
  following gift to the library: Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society, Volume V, for which they return thanks. H. L.
  Mellen, Librarian.”

  From Trinity College, Washington, D. C.: “We have received a copy of
  the fifth volume of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society and we thank you for your courtesy in sending it to the
  library. It seems even more interesting and valuable than its
  predecessors.”

  From the City Library, Springfield, Mass.: “The City Library
  gratefully acknowledges the receipt of the article—noted below—which
  you have kindly given to it. Yours very truly, Hiller C. Wellman,
  Librarian. (The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V.)”

  From Mr. John Lavelle, Cleveland, Ohio: “I wish to acknowledge the
  receipt of the annual Journal, and other literature, of the Society.
  I know of nothing better calculated to promote the interests and to
  elevate our race than the labors of the A. I. H. S. Keep up the good
  work.”

  From Dartmouth College: “I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt
  of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V,
  1905, and am instructed to tender to you the thanks of the Trustees
  of this College for the same. Very respectfully, M. D. Bisbee,
  Librarian.”

  From Timothy M. Ryan, M. D., Torrington, Conn.: “I have received
  Volume V of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  and beg to return thanks. I am very anxious to secure the four
  previous volumes, but do not know whether or not it is possible to
  obtain them.”

  From the Public Library, Detroit, Mich.: “The library has received
  from you the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, a
  gift to the library, for which, on behalf of the board of
  commissioners, I beg to return grateful acknowledgment and thanks.
  Henry M. Utley, Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Los Angeles, Cal.: “The Los Angeles Public
  Library presents its acknowledgments and thanks to the
  American-Irish Historical Society for the gift of the Journal of the
  Society, Volume V. By order of the board of directors. Chas. F.
  Lummis, Librarian.”

  From the Oswego (N. Y.) City Library: “The trustees of the Oswego
  City Library desire to thank the American-Irish Historical Society
  for the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, which has
  been received and placed in the library. Yours respectfully, Robert
  S. Kelsey, Librarian.”

  From the Library of the University of Washington, Seattle, Wash.:
  “On behalf of the University of Washington, I acknowledge with best
  thanks the receipt of the undermentioned gift. Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V. Very respectfully, H.
  C. Coffman, Librarian.”

  From the Redwood Library, Newport, R. I.: “The directors of the
  Redwood Library take pleasure in acknowledging the receipt of the
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V,
  presented by you to the library, for which they return their sincere
  thanks. Richard Bliss, Librarian.”

  From the Columbia University Library in the City of New York: “The
  trustees acknowledge with thanks the receipt of the Journal, Volume
  V, from the American-Irish Historical Society, which has been placed
  to the credit of that institution, on our exchange account. James H.
  Canfield, Librarian.”

  From Mr. Charles W. Sloane, New York City: “Volume V of the Journal
  of the American-Irish Historical Society has reached me this
  morning. Of course I have had an opportunity to only glance at the
  contents, but I have looked far enough into the volume to feel sure
  that it is most interesting.”

  From the Public Library, Minneapolis, Minn.: “The library board of
  the city of Minneapolis has received your gift, consisting of the
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, for which I am
  instructed to return a grateful acknowledgment. Very respectfully,
  Gratia Countryman, Librarian.”

  From the American Antiquarian Society: “The American Antiquarian
  Society has received your donation of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, for which I have the
  honor, on behalf of the council, to return a grateful
  acknowledgment. Edmund M. Barton, Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Newburyport, Mass.: “The directors of the
  Newburyport Public Library acknowledge, with thanks, the receipt of
  the Journal, Volume V, which will be placed with works of like
  nature and made available to the public. By order of the board, John
  D. Parsons, Librarian and Secretary.”

  From the Public Library, Buffalo, N. Y.: “The board of directors of
  the Buffalo Public Library take pleasure in thanking you for your
  valued gift of a copy of the publication named below, which will be
  carefully preserved and made useful to the public. H. L. Elmendorf,
  Librarian. (Journal, Volume V.)”

  From the Cooper Union, New York City: “The trustees have received
  one bound volume of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society, Volume V, a gift to the institution from the American-Irish
  Historical Society, for which they return their grateful
  acknowledgment. L. C. L. Jordan, Assistant Secretary.”

  From the librarian of Johns Hopkins University: “The Johns Hopkins
  University has received from the American-Irish Historical Society a
  copy of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, by
  Thomas Hamilton Murray, Volume V, and gratefully acknowledges this
  contribution to its library.”

  From Harvard University: “The president and fellows have received
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, a
  gift to the library of the university, from the Society, for which
  they return a grateful acknowledgment. William C. Lane, Librarian,
  Cambridge, Mass., January 12, 1906.”

  From the New York Historical Society: “The New York Historical
  Society has received the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society, Volume V, 8vo. Boston, 1905, a gift from the American-Irish
  Historical Society, for which I am instructed to return a grateful
  acknowledgment. Robert H. Kelby, Librarian.”

  From Mr. Michael J. Ward, Brookline, Mass.: “Your latest volume of
  the Society excels the previous ones, in my opinion. It is fine in
  every respect and I have loaned it to several of my acquaintances
  with the request that they become members of the Society. You
  certainly deserve the highest praise for its production.”

  From the University of Vermont: “The faculty of the University
  acknowledge with thanks the gift of the American-Irish Historical
  Society Journal, Volume V, 1905, from the American-Irish Historical
  Society. M. H. Buckham, President. Billings Library, Burlington,
  Vt., February 13, 1906. Edith E. Clarke, Librarian.”

  From the Rt. Rev. Mgr. Dennis J. O’Connell, M. A., S. T. D., rector
  of the Catholic University, Washington, D. C.: “I desire to
  acknowledge with many thanks the receipt of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, and to add my
  gratification of possessing such a neat and interesting historical
  production.”

  From the Narragansett Library Association, Peace Dale, R. I.: “In
  behalf of the trustees of the Narragansett Library Association, I
  beg to acknowledge the receipt of Volume V of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, for which a grateful
  acknowledgment is tendered. Very respectfully, Rose Sherman,
  Librarian.”

  From the Rhode Island Historical Society: “I have the honor to
  return to you the thanks of the Historical Society for your
  courteous gift, noted below, which has been received and placed in
  the library. Very respectfully, Clarence S. Brigham, Librarian.
  (Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, 1905.)”

  From the Newberry Library, Chicago, Ill.: “The trustees of the
  Newberry Library have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, by
  Thomas Hamilton Murray, presented by you to the library, and
  respectfully tender their thanks for the same. J. V. Cheney,
  Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Dover, N. H.: “The trustees have directed
  me to express to you their thanks for your gift, entitled Journal of
  the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V. They are very glad
  to have these valuable historical papers for permanent preservation
  in the Library. Very truly yours, C. H. Garland, Librarian.”

  From the Free Library of Philadelphia, Pa.: “The board of trustees
  have received from you as a gift to the library one copy of the
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, 1905, Volume V,
  for which they return their grateful acknowledgments. J. G.
  Rosengarten, President of Board of Trustees. John Thomson,
  Librarian.”

  From the Free Public Library, New Bedford, Mass.: “The trustees of
  the New Bedford Free Public Library have received a copy of the
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, 1905,
  presented by you to the library, for which they return a grateful
  acknowledgment. William L. Sayer, Clerk of the Board of Trustees.”

  From the Free Public Library, Worcester, Mass.: “The directors have
  received from you as a gift to the library the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, by Thomas H. Murray, for which
  they return their grateful acknowledgments. Thomas J. Barrett,
  President of the Board. Placed in the library. Samuel S. Green,
  Librarian.”

  From the Utica (N. Y.) Public Library: “The trustees acknowledge
  with thanks the gift of the Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society, Volume V, from the American-Irish Historical Society. The
  same has been officially entered in the records of the library.
  Nicholas E. Devereux, President; Caroline M. Underhill, Librarian.”

  From the City Library, Manchester, N. H.: “The trustees have
  received the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V, a gift to the library from the American-Irish Historical
  Society, for which they return a grateful acknowledgment. Eugene E.
  Reed, Mayor, and _ex-officio_ president of the Board. F. Mabel
  Winchell, Librarian.”

  From the Riggs Memorial Library, Georgetown University, Washington,
  D. C.: “On behalf of the University I beg to acknowledge the receipt
  of your courteous gift: Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society, Volume V, 1905, for which I am directed to return cordial
  thanks. Yours with much esteem, J. H. Ramspacher, Assistant
  Librarian.”

  From the Public Library, Boston, Mass.: “I am directed to return to
  you the thanks of the City of Boston for your courteous gift, noted
  below, which has been received, accepted and placed in the Public
  Library. Very respectfully, Horace G. Wadlin, Librarian. (The
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, by
  Thomas H. Murray.)”

  From Brown University, Providence, R. I.: “The Corporation of Brown
  University in Providence, R. I., have received the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, a gift to the
  University Library, from the Society, for which the corporation
  return a grateful acknowledgment on the part of the university. H.
  L. Koopman, Librarian.”

  From the New Hampshire State Library: “In behalf of the trustees I
  beg to acknowledge the receipt of the following volume sent this
  library through your kindness: Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society, Volume V, 1905. It will be their pleasure to
  give the book a fitting place upon the shelves. Yours very truly,
  Arthur Chase, State Librarian.”

  From the Bangor (Me.) Public Library: “The managers have received
  the publication named on the other side [Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V] from the American-Irish
  Historical Society, for which they return a grateful acknowledgment.
  William B. Peirce, President of the Board. Placed in the library.
  Mary H. Curran, Librarian.”

  From Bowdoin College: “The president and trustees of Bowdoin College
  have received the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V, a gift to the library, from Thomas Hamilton Murray, Esq.,
  secretary, for which they return a grateful acknowledgment. Wm. DeW.
  Hyde, President. Placed in the library January 13, 1906. Geo. T.
  Little, Librarian.”

  From the University of California: “The regents of the University of
  California acknowledge the receipt of the gift named below, for
  which I am instructed to return their grateful thanks. Very
  respectfully yours, N. A. Henderson, Acting Secretary. Placed in the
  library, J. C. Rowell, Librarian. (Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society, Volume V, 1905.)”

  From the Free Public Library, Lynn, Mass.: “The trustees have
  received the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V, by Thomas Hamilton Murray, secretary-general, a gift to
  the library, from the Society, for which they return a grateful
  acknowledgment. John W. Berry, President of the Board. Placed in the
  library. Harriet L. Matthews, Librarian.”

  From Mr. Sylvester J. O’Sullivan, New York City: “I trust you will
  pardon me for not acknowledging sooner the copy of the annual book
  of the Society, which I received from you a few weeks ago. Before
  acknowledging it, I desired to take a look into it and I had not an
  opportunity to do so until last evening. I cannot compliment you too
  highly upon the creditable result.”

  From the New York Public Library: “I am instructed by the trustees
  to acknowledge, with thanks, the receipt of the volume mentioned on
  the following page, which you have been so kind as to present to
  this library. Very respectfully, Wilberforce Eames, Lenox Librarian,
  for the director. (The Journal of the American-Irish Historical
  Society. Boston, Mass., 1905.)”

  From the Library of Congress, Washington, D. C.: “In behalf of the
  joint committee of both houses of Congress on the library, I have
  the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, presented by the
  Society to the Library of Congress. Very respectfully your obedient
  servant, Herbert Putnam, Librarian of Congress.”

  From the Peabody Institute, Peabody, Mass.: “The government have
  received the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society,
  Volume V, a gift to the library from Thomas Hamilton Murray,
  secretary-general, for which they return a grateful acknowledgment.
  Thomas Carroll, Chairman of Lyceum and Library Committee. Placed in
  the library. Lyman P. Osborn, Librarian.”

  From Mr. Dennis H. Tierney, Waterbury, Conn.: “I have received
  Volume V, Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society. I find
  it replete with historical sketches which I am sure will be
  appreciated by our race. The classification of the subject-matter is
  admirable and prompts me, an officer of the Society, to thank you
  for the painstaking research and neatness exhibited in its issue.”

  From Miss Marcella A. Fitzgerald, Gilroy, Cal.: “Please accept my
  thanks for the interesting volume of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society which I received recently. All
  that concerns the Green Isle has a charm born of the magic power
  Erin wields over the hearts of her children, and I pray that success
  will crown your efforts to preserve the records of our race in
  America.”

  From the New England Historic Genealogical Society: “The New England
  Historic Genealogical Society has received the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V, 1905, a gift from the
  American-Irish Historical Society, for which I am instructed to
  return a grateful acknowledgment. William Prescott Greenlaw,
  Librarian. Society’s House, 18 Somerset Street, Boston, January 17,
  1906.”

  From the library of the U. S. Military Academy, West Point: “I have
  the honor to acknowledge, with many thanks, the receipt of the
  following-named publication presented to this library: Journal of
  the American-Irish Historical Society, Volume V. To the secretary
  American-Irish Historical Society, 36 Newbury Street, Boston, Mass.
  Very respectfully, your obedient servant, Edward S. Holden,
  Librarian.”

  From the Thomas Crane Public Library, Quincy, Mass.: “The Thomas
  Crane Public Library of the City of Quincy has received from the
  American-Irish Historical Society, as a gift to the library, the
  book mentioned in the following schedule, for which the board of
  trustees return their sincere thanks. H. H. Keith, Secretary. (The
  Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society.) A. L. Bumpus,
  Librarian.”

  From the Very Rev. Edmund T. Shanahan, Ph. D., S. T. D., J. U. L.,
  Catholic University, Washington, D. C.: “Many thanks for Volume V of
  the Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, the receipt of
  which I hereby acknowledge. It is a genuine pleasure to read the
  growing list of the resurrected dead of our race who are made to
  live again in the warmth of affectionate recollection. I
  congratulate you.”

  From the University of Michigan: “I beg leave to acknowledge with
  best thanks the receipt of Volume V of the Journal of the
  American-Irish Historical Society, which we are much pleased to add
  to our shelves. We now have Volumes 1, 3, 4 and 5. Would it be
  possible for us to secure a copy of Volume 2? Assuring you of our
  sincere appreciation of any help you may give us in the matter, I
  am, very sincerely yours, Theo. W. Koch, Librarian.”

  From Prof. Daniel W. Shea, Ph. D., Catholic University, Washington,
  D. C.: “The fifth volume of the Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society reached me safely. Several of the articles have
  interested me very much. In the details which they contain there is
  more that appeals to our human interests than there is in the great
  national events of any country. I am glad that such details are
  finding in this Journal a repository for permanent preservation.”

  From Mr. John Mulhern, San Francisco, Cal., for the Knights of St.
  Patrick, that city: “The copy of the Journal of the American-Irish
  Historical Society, No. 5, which you mailed me for the Knights of
  St. Patrick has been received and I was very much pleased with its
  appearance. I haven’t had an opportunity of examining it carefully
  yet, but I can see there is much interesting matter in it. Mr.
  O’Connor, I am sure, will be pleased to see the sketch of the life
  of Martin Murphy, Sr., in print.”




                             GENERAL INDEX.


 Abbe Bartholome Omahony (O’Mahony), 53.

 Abbe Dowd (“Irlandais”), 53.

 “A certain green isle in a northerly sea,” 85.

 Address by President-General McGowan, 12.

 Adjutant-General of New York state, 103.

 Adjutant-General of the Sixth Corps, M. T. McMahon, 102.

 “A land here once known as Great Ireland,” 15.

 Almost pathless woods, The then, 72.

 American Academy of Social and Political Science, 130.

 American army in Montreal, The, 101.

 American Bankers’ Association, 147.

 American Geographical Society, 113.

 American Historical Association, 110.

 American Medical Association, 146, 148.

 American Oriental Society, 135.

 American prisoners put to death by the bayonet, 21.

 American revolution, Some Irish-French officers in the, 51.

 “Among the hardiest pioneers of the Cumberland Valley,” 92.

 Among the pathfinders, Sons of Ireland, 97.

 An aged man comes from Ireland to Newton, Mass., 55.

 An amazing record of Celtic leadership, 85.

 “A native of Cork,” Roger Connor, 40.

 “And 104 veterans of the Revolution acted as pall-bearers,” 30.

 A New York settlement called “Vinegar Hill,” 22.

 Annual meeting and dinner of the Society, 7.

 An interesting pioneer family, 55.

 Antietam, Battle of, 113, 147.

 Anti-Slavery movement, 114.

 Antrim, Ireland, 45.

 A prisoner aboard the _Jersey_, William Burke, 21, 22.

 A prominent Irish Catholic settler, 38.

 A remarkable Irishman—Jeremiah Conners, 48.

 A Rhode Island vessel is stranded on the Irish coast, 33.

 Armagh, Ireland, 101.

 Army of the Potomac, 102.

 “At the bloody angle of Gettysburg,” 96.

 At the head spring of the Opequan, 72.

 At the storming of Port Hudson, 113.

 A vessel from Ireland is wrecked on Block Island, 32, 33.

 Austria, General McGuire of, 41.


 Baker, Miss Virginia, of Warren, R. I., Paper by, 59, 60, 61.

 Banbridge, Ireland, Immigrants from, 72, 73.

 Barry, Commodore John, 8.

 Barry, Richard, a lieutenant in the Irish-French regiment of Walsh, 52.

 Baton Rouge, Siege of, 113.

 Belfast, Ireland, 32, 33, 35, 36, 45, 61, 62, 72, 78, 85, 89.

 Belfast Lough, Ireland, 72.

 Bellefontaine, Old Fort, 48.

 Berkeley, Bishop, 93.

 Border wars against the Indians, 40.

 Boston and vicinity, Irish pioneers in, 75.

 Boston massacre, The, 40, 106, 107.

 Boston, Ships from Ireland for Pennsylvania or Virginia put into, from
    stress of weather, etc., 77.

 Bradford, Governor of Plymouth, 15.

 Brady’s, Cyrus Townsend, new work, 20.

 “Brendan and his voyages,” 15.

 Brig _Orient_ arrives at New York from Dublin, 36.

 Brilliant Chattanooga campaign, 44.

 Bull Run, Second battle of, 112, 114.

 Burke, William, a prisoner aboard the _Jersey_, 21, 22.

 Bunker Hill Monument Association, 120.

 “But they went to work with a laugh and an ‘Irish hurrah,’” 96.


 Calhoun, John C., 96.

 Carrick-on-Suir, Ireland, 133.

 Carr, Patrick, a victim of the Boston massacre, 107.

 Carroll, Charles, of Carrollton, 95.

 Casson, Herbert N., Paper by, 85.

 Cavan, Ireland, 122.

 Celtic leadership. An amazing record of, 85.

 Celtic Medical Society, New York, 119, 146.

 Chancellorsville, Battle of, 96, 147.

 Chantilly, Battle of, 112.

 Charitable Irish Society, of Boston, 78, 80.

 Chattanooga campaign, 44.

 Chevalier McCarthy, 46.

 Cincinnati, Society of the, 142.

 Clark, Gen. George Rogers, 46, 47, 48, 68, 70.

 Clary Reunion Family, 121.

 Cleburne, Gen. Patrick R., 96.

 Collins, Patrick A., mayor of Boston, 92, 108.

 “Colonial hero of the Catskills,” Timothy Murphy, 94.

 “Color sergeant of this green flag,” 112.

 Connolly, Volume of poems by Capt. James, 99.

 Commodore John Barry, 8.

 Commodore Perry, 71.

 Commerce between Ireland and Rhode Island, 31.

 Concerning “Thomas the Irishman,” 54.

 Congressional Medal of Honor, 102, 117.

 Connor, Roger, “a native of Cork,” 40.

 Corcoran Legion, The, 103.

 Cork, Ireland, 32, 35, 36, 40, 57, 58, 76, 78, 117.

 Cork, Ireland, a great butter mart, 76.

 Cork names, McCarthy one of the great, 76.

 Cork, The brig _Lydia_ arrives at Providence, R. I., from, 35.

 Council of the Society, Executive, 5, 6.

 Crimmins, Exercises at the home of Hon. John D., New York City, 17.

 Crimmins, _Irish-American Historical Miscellany_ by Hon. John D., 20,
    21.

 Crimson field of Chancellorsville, 96.

 Croghan, George, and the defence of Fort Stephenson, 66.

 Croghan, William, 67.

 Cromwell transports Irish to New England and the West Indies, 75, 77.


 Defence of Fort Stephenson on the Sandusky, 66.

 De Fitzmaurice, Capt. Thomas, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 De Macdermott, Bernard, a lieutenant in the Irish-French regiment of
    Dillon, 51.

 DeNagle, Jacques, a lieutenant in the Irish-French regiment of Walsh,
    52.

 De Roo’s _History of America Before Columbus_, 15, 125.

 De Walsh, The Chevalier Charles, a captain in the regiment of Walsh,
    52.

 Dillon, Barthélemy, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 Dillon, Count Arthur, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 Dillon, Lieut. Thomas, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 Dillon, Regiment de, 51, 52.

 Dillon, The Chevalier Théobald, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 Dinner of the Society, Annual, 8.

 Donahoe, Patrick, founder of the Boston _Pilot_, 91, 112.

 Donegal, Ireland, 37, 40, 43, 44.

 Donegal (Pennsylvania) Presbytery, 72.

 Dollard, Patrick, an Irish redemptioner, 40.

 Dongan, Governor, 55, 93.

 Dowd, Abbe (“Irlandais”), 53.

 Dowd, Cornelius, “who came to this country about 1750,” 126.

 Dowd, Mention of paper by Willis B., 10, 11.

 Down, Ireland, 48, 72, 73, 114.

 Dring, Capt. Thomas, a prisoner aboard the _Jersey_, 27.

 Dublin, Ireland, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 41, 67, 85, 91, 124, 150.

 Dublin, A Providence, R. I., brig is lost near, 35.


 Early Irish in St. Louis, Mo., 46.

 “Early Irish Settlers of North Carolina,” 10, 11.

 Eighty-eighth New York Volunteers, 117.

 Emmet rising, The, 48.

 Executive Council of the Society, 5, 6.

 Extract from a letter by Andrew Jackson, 19.


 _Faithful Stewart_, The ship, 34.

 Fermoy, Ireland, 117.

 Field, Darby, of New Hampshire, 80.

 Foreign Wars, Military Order of, 120, 139.

 “For you know my parents were Irish,” 19.

 Frazers, The, of Pennsylvania, 39.

 “From Derry to Rhode Island,” 93.

 Frontispiece—the Hon. Theodore Roosevelt.


 General information regarding the Society, 153.

 “General Jackson, another Irishman’s son,” 70.

 Gettysburg, Battle of, 44, 96, 112, 130.

 Gilmore, Patrick Sarsfield, 91.

 _Golden Grove_, Wreck of the, 33.

 Good words for Vol. V of the Journal of the Society, 154.

 Gorman, John, “came to Pennsylvania from Ireland in 1784,” 108.


 Haleys, The, of the Isles of Shoals, 57.

 “He must have gone to Holland from Ireland some time previous to 1657,”
    54.

 Hibernian Society of Philadelphia, 44, 45.

 Historical fragments, Two interesting, 58.

 Historical Papers, Some, 21.

 _History of America Before Columbus_, De Roo’s, 15, 125.

 _History of the Slocums_, 64.

 Holland Society, The, 54.

 Horrors of the _Jersey_ prison ship, 21, 22, 27, 28, 29, 30.

 “How the Irish Came as Builders of the Nation,” 75.

 Hughes, Felix, a Pennsylvania settler, 37, 38.

 Hughes, Thomas, an Irish immigrant to Virginia, 37.


 Illinois campaign, Clark’s, 46, 47.

 Illinois National Guard, 126.

 Importation of Irish butter, 57, 58.

 Information regarding the Society, General, 153.

 Ipswich, Mass., Early Irish in, 79.

 Ireland, a brig arrives at Newport, R. I., from Waterford, 33.

 Ireland and Barbadoes, The people of, “are warm in the cause of
    America,” 33.

 Ireland and Rhode Island, Commerce between, 31.

 Ireland, A Providence, R. I., brig is lost near Dublin, 35.

 Ireland, A ship is advertised to sail from Newport, R. I., for Belfast,
    33.

 Ireland, A tragic voyage from, 61.

 Ireland, A vessel from, is wrecked on Block Island, 32, 33.

 Ireland, Belfast Lough, 72.

 Ireland, Rhode Island vessels mentioned as arrived in, 34.

 Ireland, “So many were coming from,” 78.

 Ireland, The ship _Neptune_ departs from Providence for, 36.

 Ireland to Rhode Island, Articles imported from, 32.

 Ireland, Voyages of the ship _Tristram_ between Providence, R. I., and,
    34, 35.

 Irish Academy, Royal, 121.

 _Irish-American Historical Miscellany_, a new book by Hon. John D.
    Crimmins, 20.

 “Irish blankets and Kilkenny rugs,” 76.

 Irish boys and girls transported, 75.

 Irish Brigade, Meagher’s, 112, 113, 117, 147.

 Irish butter imported, 57, 58.

 Irish coast, A Rhode Island vessel is stranded on the, 33.

 Irish, Early, in St. Louis, Mo., 46.

 Irish fatherland, The, 13.

 Irish-French officers in the American Revolution, Some, 51.

 Irish have been structural in the making of America, 85.

 Irish imprisoned aboard the _Jersey_, Many, 22.

 Irish in America, The, 85.

 Irish in the Plymouth colony, 15.

 Irish in the war against the Indian King Philip, 15.

 Irish Jasper Greens, The, 129.

 Irish manufacturers of paper, 80.

 Irish names borne by prisoners aboard the _Jersey_, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
    26.

 Irish names in the Old Dominion, 15.

 Irish pioneers in Boston and vicinity, 75.

 Irish poplins, cambrics, lawns, silks, hosiery, sheetings, butter,
    beef, pork, etc., imported, 32, 33.

 Irish ports, Voyages to and from, 32.

 _Irish Race in the Past and the Present_, Thebaud’s, 64.

 Irish in Virginia, Early, 15.

 Irish refugees locate in New York and Brooklyn, 22.

 Irish settlements, 58.

 Irish settlers in Pennsylvania, 37.

 Irish settlers on the Opequan, 71.

 Irish school teachers in Pennsylvania, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

 “Irish soldiers for discovery,” 80.

 Irish Society of Boston, Charitable, 78, 80.

 Irish trade, Rhode Island vessels in the, 32.

 Irish Tract, The district known as, 58.

 Irish women of Boston present a flag to the Twenty-eighth Massachusetts
    Regiment, 112.

 Irish youths captured by a French privateer, 78.

 “I saw the devoted Irish charge up to our breastworks,” 147.

 Isles of Shoals, The Haleys of the, 57.

 “Iveagh,” Paper by, 71.


 Jackson, Andrew, Extract from a letter by, 19.

 Jackson, Andrew, 19, 70, 95, 100, 139.

 Jefferson Barracks, 48.

 _Jersey_ prison ship, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.


 Kaskaskia, Clark’s surprise of, 47.

 “Kelly and Burke and Shea,” 86.

 Kerry, Ireland, 41, 112, 117.

 Kilkenny, Ireland, 76, 88.

 “King of the Shoals,” 57.

 King Philip, Irish in the war against, 15.

 Kinsale, Ireland, 124.


 Lake Erie, Battle of, 71.

 Lawless, Mention of paper by Hon. Joseph T., 10.

 “Les Combattants Francais de la Guerre Americaine,” 51.

 Limerick, Ireland, 58, 78, 131.

 Linehan, Hon. John C., Paper by, 75.

 Lodewicksen, Thomas (“Thomas the Irishman”), 54.

 Londonderry, Ireland, 32, 34, 36, 78, 142.

 Lookout Mountain, 44.


 McCarthy, Chevalier, 46.

 McCarthy, Florence, an early resident of Boston, 75.

 Mac-Carthy, Lieut. Eugène, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 “McCarthy is one of the great Cork names,” 76.

 Maccarty, Dennis, of Warren, R. I., 59, 60, 61.

 Macdermott, Capt. Thomas, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 McGowan, Address by President-General, 12.

 McGowan, Reception to President-General, 17.

 McGowan, Rear Admiral John (U. S. N.), Sketch of, 138, 139.

 McGuire, Edward, comes to Philadelphia in 1751, 41.

 McGuire, General, of Austria, 41.

 Maclosky, Sous-Lieut. Jacques, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 McMahon, Gen. M. T., 101, 102.

 Mahony, Sous-Lieut. Denis, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 McManus, John and Charles, 38, 39.

 MacSheehy, Sous-Lieut. Patrice, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 Many Irish imprisoned aboard the _Jersey_, 22.

 Marye’s Heights, 112, 113, 147.

 Massacre, The Boston, 40, 106, 107.

 Massacre, Wyoming Valley, 42.

 “Matthew Thornton, James Smith and George Taylor,” 95.

 _Mayflower_, The, 15, 93.

 Meagher’s Irish Brigade, 112, 113, 117, 147.

 Medal of Honor, Congressional, 102, 117.

 Membership roll of the Society, 119.

 Members of the Society who have died during the year, 112.

 Military Order of Foreign Wars, 120, 139.

 Miss Fitzgerald, The Story of, 64.

 Missouri, Early Irish in St. Louis, 46.

 Monaghan, Ireland, 39.

 Montgomery, General, 94, 101.

 “Monmouth, Brandywine and Germantown,” 67.

 Morgan, Daniel, of the Revolution, Mention of paper on, 10.

 Munster, Ireland, 81.

 Murphy, Sous-Lieut. Patrice, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 Murphy, Timothy, “colonial hero of the Catskills,” 94.

 Murray, Paper by Thomas Hamilton, 31.


 Necrology of the Society, 112.

 New Hampshire, General Court of, 58.

 Newport, R. I., A brig arrives at, from Waterford, Ireland, 33.

 Newport, R. I., a ship from Cork, Ireland, touches at, 35.

 Newry, Ireland, The brig _Recovery_ of Newport, R. I., at, 34.

 Newry, Ireland, 32, 34, 35.

 Newton, Mass., An aged settler from Ireland, in, 55.

 New York, Brig _Orient_ arrives at, from Dublin, 36.

 New York Historical Society, 22.

 “No-Linn-Hill,” Kentucky, 74.

 North Carolina, Early Irish Settlers of, 10, 11.

 Notorious British prison ships, 56.


 O’Brien, Capt. Jean, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Brien, FitzJames, 90.

 “O’Brien, MacCarty and Sullivan,” 81.

 O’Brien, Maj. Thadée, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Brien, M. J., Paper by, 37.

 O’Brien, William Desmond, 91.

 O’Briens of Machias, Me., The, 150.

 O’Brien’s School Dictionary, 56.

 O’Cahill, Sous-Lieut. Louis, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Connor, The Chevalier Armand, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Croly, Capt. Charles, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Conor, Charles, 92.

 O’Crowly, Sous-Lieut. Felix, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Driscol, Capt. Jacques, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Farel, Lieut. Claude, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 O’Farell, Lieut. Jacques, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 O’Flyn, Sous-Lieut. Jacques, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Gorman, Lieut. Charles, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Keeffe, Lieut. Patrice, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 O’Killia, David, “the Irishman,” 132.

 Omahony (O’Mahony), Abbe Bartholome, 53.

 O’Meara, Lieut. Jean-Baptiste, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Meara, Sous-Lieut. Daniel, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 O’Moran, Maj. Jacques, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 O’Moran, Sous-Lieut. Charles, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 O’Neill, Capt. Bernard, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 O’Neil, Capt. Jean, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Reilly, Capt. Jean, of the Regiment of Dillon, 51.

 O’Reilly, Count, commandant of the Louisiana Territory, 46.

 O’Reilly, John Boyle, 90.

 O’Reilly, Sous-Lieut. Charles, of the Regiment of Dillon, 52.

 O’Riordan, Lieut. Jacques, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 O’Sheil, Lieut. Jacques, of the Regiment of Walsh, 52.

 Officers of the Society, 5, 6.

 Old Brooklynites, Society of, 22.

 “Old Hickory,” 95.


 Patriots bearing Irish names who were confined aboard the _Jersey_
    prison ship, 21.

 Peach Orchard, Battle of, 122.

 Pennsylvania, Irish settlers in, 37.

 Pennsylvania, The Frazers of, 39.

 Perry, Commodore, 71.

 Phipps, Charles, “from Dublin,” 41.

 Pioneer Family, An Interesting, 55.

 Plymouth colony, Irish in the, 15.

 Pollock, Oliver, borrows $70,000 from Count O’Reilly, 46, 47.

 Port Hudson, At the storming of, 113.

 Potomac Flotilla, The, 138.

 Presidents-General of the Society, 152.

 Providence, R. I., The ship _Neptune_ departs from, for Ireland, 36.


 Queen’s County, Ireland, 115.


 Reception to President-General McGowan, 17.

 Regiment de Dillon, 51, 52.

 Regiment de Walsh, 52.

 Review of the year, 99.

 Revolutionary cavalry, Moylan the Murat of the, 95.

 Rhode Island, Commerce between Ireland and, 31.

 Roll of the Society, Membership, 119.

 Rutledge, Edward, 95, 110.


 School teachers in Pennsylvania, Early Irish, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

 _Seaflower_, Voyage of the, 61.

 Seminole War, The, 139.

 Shenandoah Valley, The, 72.

 Ships from Ireland for Pennsylvania or Virginia put into Boston from
    stress of weather, etc., 77.

 Sheridan, “Little Phil,” 96.

 Shields, Gen. James, 96.

 Six Nations, The, 38, 40.

 Sixth Corps, The, 102.

 “So many were coming from Ireland,” 78.

 Some historical papers, 21.

 “Sons of Old Hibernia,” 15.

 _South County Neighbors_, 66.

 South Mountain, 112.

 South of Ireland families, 81.

 Spottsylvania Court House, 147.

 State vice-presidents of the Society, 6.

 Stevenson, James, a, patriot of the Revolution, 56.

 Storming of Port Hudson, 113.

 Story of Miss Fitzgerald, 64.

 Sullivan, Governor James, of Massachusetts, 124.

 Sullivan, Maj.-Gen. John, proposed tablet in Providence, R. I., to the
    memory of, 16.


 Tammany patriotically honors the prison-ship victims, 30.

 “The old Prendergrass homestead,” 38.

 “The ship _Tristram_, Captain Crawford, sails this day for Dublin,” 34.

 Thickets of the Wilderness, 96.

 Thirteen coffins filled with bones of the dead, 30.

 “Thomas the Irishman,” Concerning, 54.

 Thompson, Charles, secretary of Congress, 95, 110.

 Three monuments in front of a New York church, 94.

 Tippecanoe, Battle of, 68.

 Tragic voyage from Ireland, 61.

 Twenty-eighth Massachusetts Regiment, Irish women of Boston present a
    flag to the, 112.

 Tyrone, Ireland, 88.


 Ulster, Ireland, 37, 87, 94, 95, 71.

 United Irishmen, Society of, 45.

 Unsuccessful attempts to recruit the British army in Ireland for
    America, 35.

 “Until he fell mortally wounded,” 112.


 Valley Forge, 67.

 Virginia, Paper by Hon. Joseph T. Lawless of, 10.

 Volume dedicated to Hon. John D. Crimmins and the American-Irish
    Historical Society by Cyrus Townsend Brady, LL. D., 20.

 Vol. V of the Journal of the Society, Good words for, 154.


 Wallabout, The, 21, 22, 29.

 Walsh, Patrick, United States senator, 90.

 Walsh, Regiment de, 52.

 Ward, Paper by Francis J., 46.

 “Was a noted hunter,” 37.

 Washington “was a frequent guest,” 95.

 Waterford, Ireland, 32, 33.

 Wayne, Anthony, 39.

 “We Americans are all more Irish than we realize,” 85.

 Westmeath, Ireland, 48.

 West Point military academy, 13, 124, 137.

 White Oak Swamp, Battle of, 102.

 “Without fee or reward,” 44.

 Workmen find an interesting coin, 59.

 Wyoming Valley massacre, 42.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Table of Contents added by transcriber.
 2. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 3. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 4. Footnotes were re-indexed using numbers.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 6. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
 7. Superscripts are denoted by a caret before a single superscript
      character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in
      curly braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Journal of the American-Irish
Historical Society (Vol. VI), by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL--AMERICAN-IRISH HIST. SOC. (VI) ***

***** This file should be named 63039-0.txt or 63039-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/0/3/63039/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

