The Project Gutenberg EBook of Syndrome, by Thomas Hoover

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Syndrome

Author: Thomas Hoover

Release Date: November 14, 2010 [EBook #34321]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1



Arthur Wade Hampton was fifty-nine and he'd been cleaning his Browning
shotgun for an early-morning hunting trip to Long Island--so he'd
claimed the night before--and ... she was awakened by the explosion of a
discharge. A horrible accident in the kitchen of their co-op in the
West Village.

Like Hemingway. Thinking back, they both realized it was the wrong time
of year to hunt anything--but they both also knew he wanted the world to
think that. Moreover, it was precisely the kind of vital lie they'd
need to get through the pointed questions and skeptical looks that lay
ahead. It was a knowledge all the more palpable for being unspoken.
There's no time like those first moments after a tragedy to create a
special reality for yourself.

It was only in the aftermath that she managed to unravel the reason. He
owned and operated an interior-design firm in SoHo called CitiSpace,
and he had mortgaged it to the hilt. He was on the verge of bankruptcy.
(That was why Ally had not spoken to her younger brother, Grant, in the
last 4 1/2 years.)

She felt she had no choice but to try to salvage what was left of the
business and her father's reputation. She left the architectural firm
and took over CitiSpace. It turned out she was easily as good an
interior designer as she had been an architect, and before long she had
a backlog of work and was adding staff. She restructured and,
eventually paid off the firm's debt; it was now on a sound financial
footing.

These days CitiSpace specialized in architectural rehabs in the
Greenwich Village area, with as many SoHo and TriBeCa lofts as came her
way. The work was mostly residential, but lately some lucrative
commercial office jobs were beginning to walk through the door.
Anything dependent on luxury real estate can be vulnerable in dicey
times, but she'd been able to give everybody a holiday bonus for the
past couple of years. She'd even given herself one this year, in the
form of this new condo apartment, which she loved.

Another major reason she'd taken over CitiSpace was to try to provide
her mother some peace and dignity in her twilight years. But then,
irony of ironies, Nina, who was a very lively sixty-six, was diagnosed
eighteen months ago with early-onset Alzheimer's. Now her consciousness
was rapidly slipping away.

All the things that had happened over the last few years had called for
a special kind of heart. She had known Steve Jensen, a freelance
political consultant, for eight years, and they'd lived together for
three of those, before they got married. He was warm and tender and
sexy, and she'd envisioned them in rocking chairs forty years down the
road. They'd been married for only six months when he got a job to help
reelect the president of Belize. At first he was reluctant, concerned
about human rights issues, but then he decided the other candidate, the
alternative, was even worse. So he went.

How many things can be destined to go wrong in your life? Exactly seven
months after her dad died, she received a phone call from the American
Embassy in Belmopan, Belize. Steve had been flying with the
presidential candidate over a stretch of southern rain forest in a
single-engine Cessna when a sudden thunderstorm came out of the
Caribbean and the plane lost radio contact. That was the last, etc.

She rushed there, but after two weeks the "rescue" officially became a
"recovery" mission. Except there was never any recovery. After two
months she flew back alone, the loneliest plane ride of her life.

She still had his clothes in her closet, as though to keep hope alive.
When you love someone so much you think you could never live without
them--and then one day you're forced to--it resets your thinking. Her
dad's death and then Steve's . . .

She wanted to love life, but life sometimes felt like it was asking
more than she should have to give. She currently had no one special to
spend her weekends with, but she hadn't given up, nor was she pushing
it. All things in time, except time could be running out. . . .

Brrrring went the alarm and Knickers responded with a lively "Woof" She
was anxious to get going.

"Come on, baby," Ally said. "Time for a treat."

She struggled up and made her way into the kitchen and got down a box
of small rawhide chews. It would give Knickers something to occupy her
mind for the few minutes it took to get ready.

Since she lived at the west end of Barrow Street, right across the
highway from the new Hudson River Park esplanade that defined that
mighty river's New York bank, she had a perfect course for her morning
runs. She usually liked to run down to the park at the rejuvenated
Battery Park City and then back. She didn't know what the distance was
exactly, maybe three-quarters of a mile each way, maybe slightly more,
but it fit her endurance nicely. The weather was still cool enough in
the mornings that Knickers could accompany her at full trot. In the
heat of summer, however, they both had to cut back.

She'd put on blue sweats, got her Walkman prepped with a Beethoven
quintet, and was just finishing cinching her running shoes when the
phone jangled.



_Sunday, April 5

 7:18 A.M.

_

Grant Hampton listened to the ringing and felt the sweat on his palms.
For a normal person, this would be an insane time to call, but knowing
his nutbag sister, she was probably already up and about to go out for
her daily run. And this on a Sunday morning, for chrissake, when
rational people were drinking coffee or having sex or doing something
sensible like retrieving the Times from the hallway and reading the
columns in the Business section. He had left Tanya, his runway model
live-in, to get her beauty sleep and had driven downtown at this
unthinkable hour on a mission. He was chief financial officer of
Bartlett Medical Devices, Inc., which was in imminent danger of going
under and taking him with it.

Come on, Ally. Pick up the frigging phone.

He gazed out the windshield of his blue Porsche, now parked directly
across the street from Alexa's lobby, and tried to calm his pulse. He
hadn't entirely worked out the pitch, but that was okay because he
wanted to sound spontaneous. Who was it said, "Sincerity, if you can
just fake that, you've got it made?" That was what--

"Hello."

Thank God she's picked up.

"Hi, sis, remember the sound of my voice? Long time, right?"       Come
on, he thought, give me an opening here.  There was a pause that Grant
Hampton thought lasted an eternity.

       "You picked a funny time to call."

        Is that all she has to say? Four and a half frigging years she
shuts me out of her life, blaming me, and then ...

         "Well, Ally, I figured there's gotta be a statute of
limitations on being accused of something I didn't do. So I decided to
take a flier that maybe four years and change was in the ballpark."

        "Grant, do you know what time it is? This is Sunday and--"

        "Hey, this is the hour you do your Sunday run, right? If memory
serves. So I thought I might drive down and keep you company."

         He didn't want to let her know that he was already there. That
would seem presumptuous and probably tick her off even more. But by God
he had to get to her.

         Again there was a long pause. Like she was trying to collect
and marshal her anger.

        "You want to come to see me? Now? That's a heck of a--"

         "Look, there's something really important I need to talk to
you about. It's actually a big favor for you, sis. You've surely heard
of Winston Bartlett?"

         "I've also heard of Donald Trump. So?"

         "Well, he's got a clinic out in New Jersey that--"

         "Grant, I know you're a big shot in his medical conglomerate
or whatever it is, but I'm not interested in whatever you're peddling.
I'm going out to run now."

          He heard the sound of the phone clicking off, without so much
as a good-bye.

         Jesus, he thought, she really is ticked. This is going to be
harder than I thought.

        Okay, here goes Plan B.

        He started the Porsche and slowly backed to the corner of
Washington Street, where he parked again and then hunkered down, loving
the smell of the new leather seat. Ally was going to come charging out
of the front door in about two minutes, with that damned sheepdog that
Steve gave her, assuming it was still around.

Grant Hampton was three years younger than Alexa and he lived in a
different world. Whereas she'd never wanted to be anything but an
architect, he had aimed directly for NYU School of Business. After
that, he had gone to Wall Street and gotten a broker's license and
begun an extremely lucrative career as a bond trader for Goldman Sachs.
He discovered he had the nerves, as well as a gift for handling big
numbers in his head. Soon he had a duplex co-op on the twenty-sixth
floor of a new building on Third Avenue in the East Sixties. He loved
the money and the pad He also liked how easy it was to pick up models
at downtown clubs if you had your own co-op, a Porsche, and were six
feet tall with a designer wardrobe.

That was where he met Tanya, also six feet tall, a striking (natural)
redhead who did a lot of runway work for Chloe.

He thought he was making a lot of money, but Tanya, who could order a
two-hundred-dollar bottle of Dom Perignon to have something to pass the
time while the hors d'oeuvres were being whipped up at Nobu, taught him
he was just barely getting by. She was accustomed to screwing men who
had some depth to their money.

But when he tried a financial endeavor on the side, it turned into a
disaster. Time to move on. He sent around his resume and managed to get
an interview with BMD, which was looking for someone to help them hedge
their exposure in foreign currencies. The next thing he knew, he was
trading bonds for Winston Bartlett's personal account.

When Bartlett's CFO died of a heart attack at age forty-nine (while
undergoing oral sex in the backseat of a chauffeured Lincoln Town Car),
Grant Hampton got temporarily drafted to take over his
responsibilities. That was two years ago. He was aggressive enough that
there was never a search for a replacement. He had made the big time,
and he had done it before he was thirty-five.

But now it all hung in the balance. If this didn't work out,

he could end up cold-calling widows out of Dun & Bradstreet, hawking
third-rate IPOs. Tanya would be gone in a heartbeat.

_Ally, work with me for chrissake.



Sunday, April 5

7:57 A.M._



As Alexa stepped out of the lobby, the morning was glorious and clear.
Spring had arrived in a burst of pear and cherry blossoms in the garden
of St. Luke's Church, up the street, but here by the river the morning
air was still brisk enough to make her skin tingle. The sun was
lightening the east, setting a golden halo above the skyscrapers of
mid-town. Here, with the wind tasting lightly of salt, the roadways
were Sunday-morning silent and it was a magic time that always made her
feel the world was young and perfect and she was capable of anything.

This was her private thinking time--even dreaming time--and she shared it
only with Knickers, who was trotting along beside her now, full of
enthusiasm. Ally suspected that her sheepdog enjoyed their morning runs
along the river even more than she did.

As she headed south, toward Battery Park City, she pondered the weird
phone call she'd just gotten from Grant Seth Hampton. That was his full
name. She called him Grant, but her mother, Nina, always called him
Seth. Unfortunately, by whatever name, Grant Seth Hampton, an
unremitting hustler, was still her brother. She wished it were not so,
but some things couldn't be changed.

In truth, she actually thought Grant had exhibited a kind of sequential
personality over his life. When they were kids, he'd seemed rakish but
also decent. At the time, of course, she was impulsive and rebellious
herself, admiring of his spunk. Now she viewed that as his Early
Personality.

Later, when he was pushing thirty and the Wall Street pressure and the
coke moved in, he evolved into Personality

