The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoir of Roger Williams, by James D. Knowles

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Memoir of Roger Williams
       The Founder of the State of Rhode-Island

Author: James D. Knowles

Release Date: October 1, 2020 [EBook #63358]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8




The citizens of the United States, have sometimes been ridiculed, for an
alleged propensity to please their imaginations with romantic visions
concerning the future glory of their country. They boast, it is said,
not of what the nation has been, nor of what it is, but of what it will
be. The American faculty, it is affirmed, is anticipation, not memory.

If the truth of this charge were admitted, it might be replied, that the
‘proper motion’ of the youthful imagination—in states as well as in
individuals—is towards the future. It springs forward, with buoyant
wing, forgetting the past, and disregarding the present, in the
eagerness of its desire to reach fairer scenes. It is the instinct of
our nature, the irrepressible longing of the immortal soul for something
higher and better. It is never extinguished, though frequent
disappointments abate its ardor, and long experience confirms the
testimony of revelation, that perfect happiness is sought in vain on
earth. In mature age, therefore, reason has corrected the errors of the
imagination, and the old man looks backward to his early years, as the
happiest period of his life, and praises the men and the scenes of his
youthful days, as far surpassing those which he now sees around him.[1]

Most nations are impelled, by the same principle, to recur to some past
epoch in their history, as the period of their greatest glory. There is
little in the prospect of the future to excite their hopes. The
adherents to old institutions dread the progress of that spirit of
innovation, which has already overthrown many of them, and which
threatens speedy ruin to the rest. And the patriot, who is striving to
raise his country to the enjoyment of liberty and happiness, foresees
too many obstacles, too much fierce strife, suffering and bloodshed, to
permit him to contemplate the future without anxiety.

It is the happiness of America, that almost every thing in her condition
invites her to look forward with hope. Her perfect freedom,[2] her rapid
progress, the elastic energy of her national character, the boundless
extent of her territory, her situation, far from the contentions of
European nations, and safe from the dangers both of their friendship and
of their hostility, all awaken and justify the confident hope, that she
is destined to reach a height of prosperity and power, which no other
nation, of ancient or modern times, has attained.

But if Americans were so prone to look forward, that they forgot the
past, it would certainly be a fault, which would deserve rebuke. Bright
as the future may be, the past can present scenes, on which the American
may gaze with pleasure, and from which he should draw lessons of wisdom
and incitements to patriotism. Passing by the prosperous course of our
history, since the adoption of the Constitution; not pausing to
contemplate the formation of that Constitution, though it was one of the
most glorious achievements of wisdom and national virtue; looking beyond
the unparalleled revolution itself; the character and actions of the men
who laid the foundations of this country deserve the careful study, and
must attract the admiration, of every true-hearted American. The
motives, the policy, the personal qualities of the founders; their
fervent piety, their courage and patience, their unwavering constancy,
their calm wisdom, their love of learning, and their thirst for liberty,
entitle those venerable men to the affection and gratitude of every
succeeding generation. Their faults we may now see more clearly than
their contemporaries; but those faults were, for the most part, the
excesses of their virtues, the errors of wise heads and pure hearts,
whose piety sometimes became austere, and whose conscientious love of
truth occasionally betrayed them into intolerance. There is no stain
upon their personal character; and the American may point, with grateful
pleasure, to the bright names of Winslow, Winthrop, Hooker, Penn,
Baltimore, Oglethorpe, and their associates, as among the choicest
treasures of his country.

Among these names, that sense of justice, which eventually triumphs over
temporary prejudice and wrong, has already placed that of ROGER
WILLIAMS. Long misunderstood and misrepresented, he was excluded from
his appropriate place among the chief founders and benefactors of
New-England. The early historians, Morton, Mather, Hubbard, and even
Winthrop, spoke harshly of his character. His principles, both political
and religious, were offensive to the first generations; and it is not
strange, that he was viewed and treated as a fanatical heresiarch in
religion, and a factious disturber of the state.

Later writers have treated his memory with more respect; and we might
quote many honorable testimonies to his principles and his character.
But no extended memoir of his life has ever before been published. It
would not be difficult to assign reasons for this neglect. The want of
materials, and the contradictory accounts of various writers, were
sufficient to deter his friends from the undertaking, and a lingering
prejudice against him prevented others. The attention of some able
writers has, nevertheless, been drawn to the subject. Dr. Belknap
designed to give to the life of Roger Williams a place in his American
Biography, and he made application to several persons in Rhode-Island
for materials, but without success. It was announced, a few years since,
that Robert Southey, Esq. intended to write the life of Mr. Williams. He
probably relinquished the plan, for the same reason. The Rev. Mr.
Greenwood, of Boston, formed the design of preparing a memoir, at the
suggestion, I believe, of Mr. Southey. Mr. Greenwood collected many
valuable materials, but the failure of his health, and other causes,
induced him to abandon the undertaking.[3]

My attention was directed to the subject, in 1829, by hearing the Rev.
Dr. Sharp, of Boston, pronounce, with his usual eloquence and true love
of freedom, a eulogium on the character of Roger Williams. I soon
afterwards suggested to him, that the life of Mr. Williams ought to be
better known. He urged me to undertake the office of biographer, and
many other friends concurred in the request. I consented, having
learned—that Mr. Greenwood had resolved to relinquish the design. I made
an application to him, however, to be informed of his real purposes.
With the most generous politeness, he placed at my disposal all the
materials which he had collected. Among them were between twenty and
thirty unpublished letters, copied from the originals, which were kindly
lent to him by the Hon. Thomas L. Winthrop. These letters form a
valuable part of this volume.

In my further search for information, I soon discovered, that many
persons, well acquainted with our early history, knew very little of
Roger Williams. In the books, I found almost every important fact,
concerning him, stated differently. I was obliged to gather hints from
disconnected documents, and to reconcile contradictory assertions; and
in fine, my labor often resembled that of the miner, who sifts large
masses of sand, to obtain a few particles of gold. I have spared neither
toil nor expense to obtain materials. I have endeavored to make the book
as complete and accurate as possible. It has cost me much time, and a
degree of labor, which no one can estimate, who has not been engaged in
similar investigations.

I have, however, received much aid from several individuals. Besides Mr.
Greenwood, my thanks are especially due to the venerable Nestor of
Providence, Moses Brown, and to John Howland, Esq. Other gentlemen are
entitled to my gratitude, whom it would give me pleasure to name. I
have, too, derived great assistance from several books. Among these I
ought to mention Mr. Backus’ History, from which I have copied a number
of valuable documents, and gathered important information. Mr. Savage’s
admirable edition of Winthrop’s Journal has been my chief guide, in
narrating the early events of Mr. Williams’ history, after his arrival
in this country. From the valuable Annals of Dr. Holmes, and from the
Library and the Collections of the Massachusetts Historical Society, I
have derived important aid.

I have strongly felt the want of a history of Rhode-Island. I have been
obliged to relate many historical facts, which I have collected, in
various ways, at the hazard of mistake and deficiency. It has been
somewhat mortifying to me, as a native of Rhode-Island, to be obliged to
rely on the writers of Massachusetts and Plymouth, for facts concerning
the history of Rhode-Island, which could not, otherwise, be ascertained.
While all the other New-England States, and indeed most of the States of
the Union, have histories, it is hoped that Rhode-Island will not much
longer be content to bear the reproach, of being indebted to other
States for her knowledge of her own history. I am glad to learn, that
the papers of the late Theodore Foster, Esq. are now in the possession
of the Rhode-Island Historical Society. I hope that the Society will
immediately appoint some competent person to prepare a history of the
State. The Legislature ought to aid in procuring the requisite documents
from England, and in defraying other necessary expenses. The State has
no reason to be ashamed of her history. She owes it to herself to record
it truly.

The want of such a history has induced me to insert in this volume
several documents which cannot readily be found. I am not aware of any
Rhode-Island publication, except a file of newspapers, in which a copy
of the first charter is contained. The second charter is not easily to
be procured. Very few, probably, of the citizens possess a copy.

It may, indeed, be objected to this book, that it is encumbered with
documents. But I have desired to furnish the reader with the means of
forming an acquaintance with Mr. Williams, by a perusal of his own
letters, and other writings. These are never common-place. They are all
marked with the impress of his character. The numerous authorities have
been added, in order that if I have committed mistakes, the reader might
have the means of correcting them. It would be strange, if, amid so much
contradiction and confusion, I have fallen into no errors. I can only
say, that I have anxiously labored to learn the truth; and I shall be
thankful for any suggestions, which may tend to make the book more
accurate and useful.

A few of the notes are marked “G.” They were appended by Mr. Greenwood
to the documents which he loaned to me, and I have taken the liberty to
copy them, as valuable illustrations.

